EN BANC
[G.R. No. 225152. October 5, 2021.]
PARTIDO DEMOKRATIKO PILIPINO-LAKAS NG BAYAN (PDPLABAN) herein represented by its Secretary-General, CONG.
PANTALEON "BEBOT" ALVAREZ, petitioner,
LEON ESTRELLA PERALTA, MELCHOR GRUELA MAGDAMO,
and OTHELLO ESTROPIGAN DALANON, intervenors, vs.
COMMISSION ON ELECTIONS EN BANC, respondent.

DECISION

M.V. LOPEZ, J :
p

The core issue in this Petition for Certiorari 1 is whether the
Commission on Elections (COMELEC) is guilty of grave abuse of discretion
when it extended the deadline for the submission of Statements of
Contributions and Expenditures (SOCEs).


ANTECEDENTS
On October 2, 2015, the COMELEC issued Resolution No. 9991, 2
prescribing the guidelines for the submission of the SOCEs for the May 9,
2016 national and local elections. The COMELEC reminded the candidates
and the political parties to submit their SOCEs not later than June 8, 2016.
The deadline is "ﬁnal and non-extendible" and any submission ﬁled beyond
such date will not be accepted. 3 This is pursuant to Section 14 of Republic
Act (RA) No. 7166 4 which provides that the SOCEs must be ﬁled within 30
days after the day of the elections, to wit:
SEC. 14.
Statement of Contributions and Expenditures:
Effect of Failure to File Statement. — Every candidate and treasurer of
the political party shall, within thirty (30) days after the day of
the election, ﬁle in duplicate with the oﬃces of the Commission the
full, true and itemized statement of all contributions and expenditures
in connection with the election.
No person elected to any public oﬃce shall enter upon
the duties of his oﬃce until he has ﬁled the statement of
contributions and expenditures herein required.
The same prohibition shall apply if the political party which
nominated the winning candidate fails to ﬁle the statement required
herein within the period prescribed by this Act.
Except candidates for elective barangay office, failure to file the
statements or reports in connection with electoral contributions and
expenditures as required herein shall constitute an administrative
oﬀense for which the oﬀenders shall be liable to pay an

administrative fine ranging from One thousand pesos ([P]1,000.00)
to Thirty thousand pesos ([P]30,000.00), in the discretion of the
Commission.
The ﬁne shall be paid within thirty (30) days from receipt of
notice of such failure; otherwise, it shall be enforceable by a writ of
execution issued by the Commission against the properties of the
offender.
It shall be the duty of every city or municipal election registrar
to advise in writing, by personal delivery or registered mail, within
ﬁve (5) days from the date of election all candidates residing in his
jurisdiction to comply with their obligation to ﬁle their statements of
contributions and expenditures.
For the commission of a second or subsequent oﬀense under
this section, the administrative ﬁne shall be from Two thousand pesos
([P]2,000.00) to Sixty thousand pesos ([P]60,000.00), in the
discretion of the Commission. In addition, the oﬀender shall be
subject to perpetual disqualiﬁcation to hold public oﬃce.
(Emphases supplied.)

On June 23, 2016, the COMELEC En Banc, through Resolution No.
10147, 5 extended the ﬁling of SOCEs until June 30, 2016. The candidates
and political parties who will submit their SOCEs on or before the new
deadline will not incur any administrative liability. 6 The majority of the
commissioners explained that the law in providing that "[n]o person elected
to any public oﬃce shall enter upon the duties of his oﬃce until he has ﬁled
the statement of contributions and expenditures herein required" implies
that the SOCEs may be submitted beyond the 30-day period. Moreover, the
COMELEC previously allowed extension of time in ﬁling the SOCEs due to
legal necessity and to prevent vacuum in the public service, 7 thus:
WHEREAS, the Commission En Banc received several letter
requests for extension of the deadline to ﬁle the required SOCE for
the May 9, 2016 National and Local Elections (NLE);
WHEREAS, as records show, the deadlines for the ﬁling of
SOCE has been invariably and consistently extended by the
Commission out of legal necessity and particularly in the
2010 and 2013 NLE wherein the Commission allowed the extension
of the deadline for filing of SOCE;
xxx xxx xxx
WHEREAS, it is clear from the express language of the
above-quoted provision that the phrase, "until he has ﬁled
the statement of contributions and expenditures herein
required," implies that the SOCE may be ﬁled beyond the
deadline of thirty (30) days from the date of the elections as
fixed herein.
NOW, THEREFORE, the Commission En Banc, RESOLVED x x x,
to EXTEND the deadline of ﬁling the Statement of Contributions and
Expenditures to 30 June 2016 x x x in order to: (a) enable candidates
and parties who failed to submit their SOCEs or whose SOCEs do not
comply with the RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING CAMPAIGN

FINANCE AND DISCLOSURE to submit or correct their campaign
ﬁnance statements or reports; and (b) encourage disclosure by
candidates and parties their campaign contributions and expenditures
during the 2016 NLE and to enable the Commission to initiate the
ﬁling of administrative cases for the violation of Section 14 of
Republic Act No. 7166 and election oﬀenses related to campaign
finance.
xxx xxx xxx
We ﬁnd it abhorrent to adopt the erroneous
interpretation that our duly elected public oﬃcials cannot
assume oﬃce simply because of the failure of the party
treasurer to submit the party's SOCE within the 30-day period
deadline. The resulting frustration of the people's mandate,
the widespread vacuum in the public service, and the
likelihood of a constitutional crisis, constitute an absurdity
not contemplated by the law. These are risks that the
Commission is not willing to take. 8 (Emphases supplied and
citation omitted.)

On July 7, 2016, the Partido Demokratiko Pilipino-Lakas ng Bayan (PDPLaban) ﬁled a Petition for Certiorari 9 questioning COMELEC En Banc
Resolution No. 10147. The PDP-Laban argues that the COMELEC exceeded
the limits of its delegated rule-making authority and violated Section 14 of
RA No. 7166 that the SOCEs must be ﬁled within 30 days after the elections.
The COMELEC should have retained the original deadline to avoid
perceptions of partiality given that other candidates and political parties
timely complied with the requirement. Lastly, PDP-Laban claims that it
availed the proper remedy to assail the resolution considering that the
issues involved are of transcendental importance. 10
On the other hand, the COMELEC in its Comment 11 insists that the 30day period ﬁle SOCEs is extendible absent any prohibition from the language
of the law. The COMELEC points out that the commas in the ﬁrst sentence of
Section 14 of RA No. 7166 after the phrase " Every candidate and treasurer
of the political party shall" and before the phrase "ﬁle in duplicate with the
oﬃces of the Commission the full, true and itemized statement of all
contributions and expenditures in connection with the election" separated
the phrase "within thirty (30) days after the day of the election." This
suggests that only the act of ﬁling the SOCEs is mandatory. The COMELEC
reiterates that the phrase "until he has ﬁled the statement of contributions
and expenditures herein required" in the second sentence of Section 14 of
RA No. 7166 means that the 30-day period is extendible. Indeed, the
COMELEC even extended the deadline for submission of the SOCEs in the
2010 and 2013 elections for 15 days, and one year, respectively. Further,
the COMELEC possessed broad law enforcement powers in the exigency of
public service 12 and issued the resolution not to favor any particular
candidate or political party. 13 More importantly, the submission of SOCEs
strictly within the 30-day period will serve as an additional qualiﬁcation to
political candidates outside those enumerated under the Constitution and
the Local Government Code. Finally, the COMELEC counters that PDP-Laban

is not entitled to the remedy of certiorari because it did not suﬀer any injury.
14

In its Comment, 15 the Oﬃce of the Solicitor General (OSG) disagrees
with the COMELEC and opines that the ﬁling of SOCEs within 30 days after
the election is mandatory. The phrase " until he has ﬁled the statement of
contributions and expenditures herein required" contemplates the 30-day
period and not ad infinitum. The COMELEC must implement the unambiguous
language of Section 14 of RA No. 7166. Yet, the COMELEC usurped the
legislative power when it extended the deadline and suspended the
enforcement of election laws. Lastly, the OSG argues that the COMELEC's
attack against the validity of Section 14 of RA No. 7166 on the ground that it
creates additional qualiﬁcations to political candidates is not the lis mota of
the case and need not be discussed.
Meantime, Leon Estrella Peralta, Melchor Gruela Magdamo, and Othello
Estropigan Dalanon (Peralta, et al.), in their capacities as taxpayers, moved
to intervene in the proceedings. Peralta, et al., reiterate the mandatory
nature of the 30-day period and maintain that any delay will give the
candidates and the political parties the opportunity to fabricate their SOCEs.
Also, Peralta, et al., ask that the winning candidates who did not submit their
SOCEs within the required period must be prohibited from entering their
public duties, thus, allowing the rule on succession to operate. Lastly,
Peralta, et al., insinuate that the commissioners who voted to extend the
deadline should be held guilty of betrayal of public trust. 16
RULING

PDP-Laban and Peralta, et al., have
legal standing to question
COMELEC Resolution No. 10147
because the legal issue involved is of
transcendental importance.
On procedural matters, it bears emphasis that judicial review may be
exercised only when the party challenging the act has the requisite legal
standing which refers to a personal and substantial interest in the case such
that he has sustained, or will sustain, direct injury as a result of its
enforcement. 17 The party's interest must also be material as distinguished
from mere interest in the question involved, or a mere incidental interest. It
must be personal and not based on a desire to vindicate the constitutional
right of some third and unrelated party. 18 However, the Court has taken an
increasingly liberal approach to the rule of locus standi, evolving from the
stringent requirements of "personal injury" to the broader "transcendental
importance" doctrine. 19
Here, the PDP-Laban and Peralta, et al., are able to craft an issue of
transcendental importance. The matters raised in the petition and motion for
intervention involved possible violation of the Constitution, speciﬁcally, the
COMELEC's exercise of legislative power without proper delegation. The
resolution of the case will also have far-reaching consequences aﬀecting all
political candidates and their liabilities for non-compliance with the timely

submission of their SOCEs. Moreover, the situation calls for review because it
is capable of repetition. The Court takes judicial notice that electoral
exercises are regularly held, and that the COMELEC had previously issued
similar guidelines extending the period to ﬁle the SOCEs. Corollarily, direct
recourse to this Court through a petition for certiorari is allowed. The petition
and motion likewise concern a purely legal question. 20

COMELEC committed grave abuse
of discretion when it extended the
deadline for filing of the SOCEs and
exempted candidates and political
parties from administrative liabilities
in violation of the clear language of
the law and legislative intent.
Anent the substantive issues, the Court rules that the COMELEC cannot
validly extend the deadline for submission of the SOCEs and exempt the
candidates and political parties from administrative liabilities. The Court
agrees with the PDP-Laban and Peralta, et al., that the language of Section
14 of RA No. 7166 is unambiguous and that the required SOCEs must be
ﬁled within 30 days after the elections. Foremost, verba legis non est
recedendum is a basic rule in statutory construction. 21 The maxim
translates "from the words of a statute there should be no departure."
Diﬀerently stated, a statute that is clear is not susceptible to interpretation
and should be applied regardless of who may be aﬀected, even if the law is
harsh and onerous. 22 The remedy is with Congress to modify or even
abandon the law. 23
Contrary to the COMELEC's interpretation, the commas separating the
phrase "within thirty (30) days after the day of the election" from the rest of
the ﬁrst sentence of Section 14 of RA No. 7166 do not make the period to
ﬁle SOCEs extendible. A comma is a punctuation mark used to divide a
sentence, but it does not introduce a new idea. 24 As such, the separated
phrase must relate to the same subject matter which precedes it.
Notably, the provisions "within thirty (30) days after the day of the
election " is preceded by the phrase "Every candidate and treasurer of the
political party shall" and followed by the phrase "ﬁle in duplicate with the
oﬃces of the Commission the full, true and itemized statement of all
contributions and expenditures in connection with the election."
I n Pilar v. COMELEC, 25 the Court explained that the word "shall"
implies that the statute imposes a duty that may be enforced, particularly if
public policy favors this meaning or where the public interest is involved. 26
In said case, the Court held that the word "shall" in the ﬁrst sentence of
Section 14 of RA No. 7166 which requires the ﬁling of SOCEs is mandatory.
27 The Court recognized that the state is interested in seeing that the
electoral process is clean and ultimately expressive of the true will of the
electorate. This objective may be realized through legislation regulating and
compelling the publication of the contributions and expenditures of
candidates.

Moreover, these laws and regulations prescribe what contributions are
prohibited and what expenditures are authorized. Corollarily, the mandatory
nature of the word "shall" extends to the observance of the 30-day ﬁling
period. Otherwise, the phrase " within thirty (30) days after the day of
elections" becomes useless and meaningless. Indeed, the prompt submission
of the SOCEs favors public policy and interest in promoting a culture of
compliance with the campaign finance provisions towards a clean and honest
election.
Similarly, the COMELEC's interpretation that the 30-day period is
extendible because of the phrase "until he has ﬁled the statement of
contributions and expenditures herein required" in the second sentence of
Section 14 of RA No. 7166 is incorrect. The words " herein required"
contemplates the two-fold duty of the candidates and political parties to
submit their SOCEs and file it within the prescribed period.
Furthermore, the legislative deliberations reveal that winning
candidates must submit the SOCEs before assumption of oﬃce. The
intervening period from the expiration of 30 days to ﬁle SOCEs until
assumption of oﬃce allows interested parties to inquire whether winning
candidates submitted the required SOCEs and to prevent them from entering
their official duties, if necessary.
Also, the Congress opted to retain the provision despite proposal to
delete the proscription from assuming oﬃcial duties against winning
candidates who did not file the SOCEs, viz.:
MR. ALBANO.
Well, Mr. Speaker, again a provision on Section 15 states, "That
no person elected to any public office shall enter upon the
duties of his oﬃce until he has ﬁled the statement of
contributions and expenditures herein required." Now, Mr.
Speaker, how do we verify whether that candidate — the elected
candidate has ﬁled his statement of contributions and
expenditures? We are aware, Mr. Speaker, and based from the
press reports of the COMELEC that even in this House there are
many who did not comply with this provision. And yet, it is said
here that he cannot assume his duties as such elected oﬃcial if
he has failed to ﬁle the statement of contributions and
expenditures. So, Mr. Speaker, how do we verify this?
MR. PALACOL.
Your Honor, there are oﬃces where the statement of
contributions and expenses are supposed to be ﬁled. Now, 30
days after the election they are supposed to ﬁle that
statement of expenses and their contributions. With this
provision of law, any candidate or any interested party
can go to the particular oﬃce where the supposed
statement has to be ﬁled. And from that they can verify
whether or not this particular winning candidate had ﬁled
his statement of contribution and expenditures. Now, it
says here that not until and unless this winning candidate has
ﬁled his statement of contribution and expenses he cannot

assume office.
MR. ALBANO.
It is very clear here, the provision that the elected one cannot
enter upon the duties of his oﬃce. My question is, how can we
verify this? What can stop the elected candidate or the elected
one enter into his duties? As I said if we base from the press
reports that there are many — even who are Members of this
Congress have not ﬁled their statement of contributions and
expenditures and the reason why they are now facing criminal
charges.


xxx xxx xxx
MR. PALACOL.
. . . Your Honor, as I was stating, these 30 days period is
allotted to any person who runs for a public office.
Now if a winning candidate is really desirous of assuming
his position, as a matter of fact, you will observe that our
election is on May 11, 1992 and the assumption is on June
30, which is more than 30 days. You can easily determine
whether or not he had ﬁled the corresponding statement.
He is going to assume his oﬃce afternoon of June 30,
1992, more than 30 days period. So, he could just simply
go to the particular oﬃce and check there whether this
particular winning candidate had ﬁled his statement. This
is the scenario that will happen.
MR. ALBANO.
x x x. Why are we providing this, when this is only honored in
breach than in compliance, Mr. Speaker? Is the Gentleman aware
that there are even Members of Congress now facing criminal
charges for failure to ﬁle statement of contributions and
expenditures?
MR. PALACOL.
I am aware of that situation, your Honor, but as I was telling, your
Honor, there is suﬃcient time within which to verify whether or
not this particular candidate — of course when one assumes
his oﬃce, in order that there will be no hindrance, I feel
that he has to comply with the provision of law and that
he ﬁle his statement of expenditure and contribution.
Anyway, as I have stated a while ago, there are suﬃcient time.
Our election is on May 11, 1992, and they are going to assume
office only more than 30 days . . . 28
xxx xxx xxx
MR. ALBANO.
Mr. Speaker, my last query was about the veriﬁcation of how to
comply with item (b) of Section 15 and I would like to get the
reaction of our distinguished sponsor. How can this item (b) be
fully implemented without being disregarded in the sense that an
elected public oﬃce may enter into the duties of his oﬃce
without complying with the ﬁling of the statement of

expenditures and contributions? Because even in this very halls
of Congress according to the Commission on Elections, there
were many or there are members of Congress who are now
facing criminal charges for violation of the Election Code.
MR. PALACOL.
Your Honor, we agree with you on the present situation that
there are some winning candidates . . . there are some winning
candidates who up to the present have not yet ﬁled their
statement of expenditures and contributions. Well, in order to
compel or hasten the ﬁling of the certiﬁcate of
expenditures and contributions, we inserted in this
provision of the present measure that before [he enters]
the assumption of the oﬃce to which he ran for and won,
he has to ﬁle his certiﬁcate of expenditures and
contributions. And you will observe, Your Honor, that is very
explicit here: "No person elected to any public oﬃce shall
enter upon the duties of his oﬃce until he has ﬁled the
statement of contributions and expenditures herein
required." In other words, it is the duty of the winning
candidate to ﬁle his certiﬁcate of expenditures and
contributions before he enters into assumption of his
duties.
Now, anybody can question this winning candidate. And of
course, we know that there are oﬃces where a particular
candidate has to ﬁle his certiﬁcate of statement of expenditures
and contributions.
MR. ALBANO.
For the sake of argument, Mr. Speaker, . . .
MR. PALACOL.
Although, of course, there is always that possibility that a
candidate who had won may enter his duties without even ﬁling
his certiﬁcate of expenditures and contributions. But that is an
exception to the general rule.
MR. ALBANO.
Now, Mr. Speaker, for the sake of argument, suppose an elected
person did not ﬁle his statement of contributions and
expenditures as herein required, and then enters into an oﬃce,
how is he going to be booted out of that office?
MR. PALACOL.
I think, Your Honor, there is a proper remedy for that in our
courts of law.
MR. ALBANO.
So there is a need . . .
MR. PALACOL.
He could be enjoined from assuming the position to which
he was elected.
MR. ALBANO.

But he has taken his oath of oﬃce and actually performed —
does it mean therefore that one has to ﬁle a case in court before
he can be . . .
MR. PALACOL.
He has to ﬁle before he takes his oath — before he
assumes the position he has to ﬁle his certiﬁcate of
expenditures and contributions.
MR. ALBANO.
Mr. Speaker, the elected oﬃcial has already entered into his
duties, and as a matter of fact, exercised his duties but has failed
to ﬁle at the required day or the required period of time, how is
he going to be stopped from assuming when he has already
assumed oﬃce? Is there going to be a protest? And it seems
there is no penal provision in this section?
MR. PALACOL.
What is your suggestion, Your Honor?
MR. ALBANO.
Well, my recommendation is we might as well be silent and allow
the Revised Election Code provisions to prevail. After all those
who have failed to ﬁle their statement of contributions and
expenditures are now facing criminal charges. And so it is best
that we delete this particular provision so that we do not
carry a provision here that is honored more in breach
than in compliance.
MR. PALACOL.
Your Honor, you may formulate your proposed amendment and
we are going to consider that in the Period of Individual
Amendments. 29 (Emphases supplied.)

The COMELEC's blanket extension of the period to ﬁle SOCEs likewise
amounts to usurpation of legislative power. In Loong v. COMELEC, 30 the
Court rejected the COMELEC's similar stance to extend the time to ﬁle a
petition for cancellation of certificate of candidacy, to wit:
It is true that the discovery of false representation as to
material facts required to be stated in a certiﬁcate of candidacy,
under Section 74 of the Code, may be made only after the lapse of
the 25-day period prescribed by Section 78 of the Code, through no
fault of the person who discovers such misrepresentations and who
would want the disqualiﬁcation of the candidate committing the
misrepresentation. It would seem, therefore, that there could indeed
be a gap between the time of the discovery of the misrepresentation,
(when the discovery is made after the 25-day period under Sec. 78 of
the Code has lapsed) and the time when the proclamation of the
results of the election is made. During this so-called "gap" the wouldbe petitioner (who would seek the disqualiﬁcation of the candidate) is
left with nothing to do except to wait for the proclamation of the
results, so that he could avail of a remedy against the
misrepresenting candidate, that is, by ﬁling a petition for quo
warranto against him. Respondent Commission sees this "gap" in

what it, calls a procedural gap which, according to it, is unnecessary
and should be remedied.
At the same time, it cannot be denied that it is the
purpose and intent of the legislative branch of the
government to ﬁx a deﬁnite time within which petitions for
protests related to eligibility of candidates for elective oﬃces
must be ﬁled, as seen in Sections 78 and 253 of the Code.
Respondent Commission may have seen the need to remedy
this so-called "procedural gap," but it is not for it to prescribe
what the law does not provide, its function not being
legislative. The question of whether the time to ﬁle these
petitions or protests is too short or ineﬀective is one for the
Legislature to decide and remedy. 31 (Emphasis supplied)

As discussed earlier, the Congress ﬁxed the period to ﬁle SOCEs "within
thirty (30) days after the day of the election." Hence, the COMELEC cannot
arbitrarily extend the deadline and substitute its own wisdom in deﬁance
with the clear legislative intent. The COMELEC likewise cannot conveniently
invoke the exigency of public service to justify its actions. The COMELEC's
task is to administer and not to interpret the election laws. At most, the
COMELEC can only provide details to implement the statute but not to
supplant the expressed provisions of the law.
In Maturan v. COMELEC, 32 the Court recognized the Congress' absolute
discretion to penalize with perpetual disqualiﬁcation to hold public oﬃce
those persons who repeatedly failed to submit their SOCEs. The Court
stressed that the wisdom of Congress in enacting a law to ensure the
sanctity of the electoral process should be respected unless adequately
shown to be unconstitutional. 33 In this case, the arbitrary extension of the
deadline to ﬁle SOCEs will render nugatory the Court's decision in Maturan
and exempt non-compliant candidates and political parties from any liability
and other legal consequences.
The Court reiterates that the ﬁling of complete SOCEs within the 30day period is mandatory. Yet, it bears emphasis that Section 14 of RA No.
7166 does not prohibit the COMELEC from receiving belatedly ﬁled or tardy
SOCEs. Speciﬁcally, the winning candidates can still enter the duties of their
office once they submitted the required SOCEs. This is the clear import of the
second sentence of Section 14 of RA No. 7166 which provides that no person
elected to any public oﬃce shall enter upon the duties of his oﬃce "until he
has ﬁled the statement of contributions and expenditures herein required."
The word "until" signiﬁes that the prohibition to assume oﬃce is conditional
and subject to the filing of the SOCEs.
A similar interpretation must be given to the third sentence of Section
14, RA No. 7166 which states that " [t]he same prohibition shall apply if the
political party which nominated the winning candidate fails to ﬁle the
statement required herein within the period prescribed by this Act." This is
because the third sentence explicitly refers to "the same prohibition"
mentioned in the second sentence. At most, the non-compliance with
Section 14, RA No. 7166 will trigger only the imposition of administrative
liabilities provided by law.

Further, the fourth sentence of Section 14, RA No. 7166 penalizes the
failure to file SOCEs with administrative fines.
And, in case of repeated non-compliance, the seventh sentence of
Section 14, RA No. 7166 provides a stiﬀer penalty of administrative ﬁnes
plus perpetual disqualification to hold public office.
Clearly, the COMELEC committed grave abuse of discretion in issuing
the assailed resolution. The arbitrary extension of the deadline for the
submission of the SOCEs eﬀectively condoned erring candidates and political
parties from administrative liabilities even if the law does not provide any
exempting circumstances.
However, the Court is not at liberty to discuss the COMELEC's
argument that Section 14 of RA No. 7166 is unconstitutional allegedly
because it prescribed additional qualiﬁcations to national and local elective
positions. The power of judicial review is limited to an actual case or
controversy involving a conﬂict of legal rights as distinguished from an
abstract dispute. 34
More importantly, the "rules of avoidance" calls for judicial restraint in
passing upon constitutional questions if other grounds exist as bases for the
decision, viz.:
The so-called "seven pillars of limitations of judicial review" or the
"rules of avoidance" enunciated by US Supreme Court Justice
Brandeis in his concurring opinion in Ashwander v. Tennessee Valley
Authority teaches that:
1.
The Court will not pass upon the
constitutionality of legislation in a friendly, non-adversary
proceeding, declining because to decide such questions
"is legitimate only in the last resort, and as a necessity in
the determination of real, earnest and vital controversy
between individuals. It never was the thought that, by
means of a friendly suit, a party beaten in the legislature
could transfer to the courts an inquiry as to the
constitutionality of the legislative act."
2.
The Court will not "anticipate a question of
constitutional law in advance of the necessity of deciding
it." "It is not the habit of the Court to decide questions of
a constitutional nature unless absolutely necessary to a
decision of the case."
3.
The Court will not "formulate a rule of
constitutional law broader than is required by the precise
facts to which it is to be applied."
4.
The Court will not pass upon a constitutional
question, although properly presented by the record, if
there is also present some other ground upon which the
case may be disposed of. This rule has found most varied
application. Thus, if a case can be decided on either of
two grounds, one involving a constitutional question, the
other a question of statutory construction or general law,
the Court will decide only the latter. Appeals from the

highest court of a state challenging its decision of a
question under the Federal Constitution are frequently
dismissed because the judgment can be sustained on an
independent state ground.


5.
The Court will not pass upon the validity of a
statute upon complaint of one who fails to show that he is
injured by its operation. Among the many applications of
this rule, none is more striking than the denial of the right
of challenge to one who lacks a personal or property
right. Thus, the challenge by a public oﬃcial interested
only in the performance of his oﬃcial duty will not be
entertained. In Fairchild v. Hughes , the Court aﬃrmed the
dismissal of a suit brought by a citizen who sought to
have
the
Nineteenth
Amendment
declared
unconstitutional.
In Massachusetts v. Mellon , the
challenge of the federal Maternity Act was not entertained
although made by the Commonwealth on behalf of all its
citizens.
6.
The Court will not pass upon the
constitutionality of a statute at the instance of one who
has availed himself of its benefits.
7.
"When the validity of an act of the Congress
is drawn in question, and even if a serious doubt of
constitutionality is raised, it is a cardinal principle that
this Court will ﬁrst ascertain whether a construction of the
statute is fairly possible by which the question may be
avoided."
Meanwhile,
in Francisco, Jr. v. Nagmamalasakit na mga
Manananggol ng mga Manggagawang Pilipino, Inc., the Court
summarized the foregoing "pillars" into six categories and adopted
"parallel guidelines" in the exercise of its power of judicial review, to
wit:
The foregoing "pillars" of limitation of judicial
review, summarized in Ashwander v. Tennessee Valley
Authority from diﬀerent decisions of the United States
Supreme Court, can be encapsulated into the following
categories:
1.

that there be absolute necessity of deciding a

case
2.
that rules of constitutional law shall be
formulated only as required by the facts of the case
3.
that judgment may not be sustained on some
other ground
4.
that there be actual injury sustained by the
party by reason of the operation of the statute
5.

that the parties are not in estoppel

6.
that the Court upholds the presumption of
constitutionality

As stated previously, parallel guidelines have been
adopted by this Court in the exercise of judicial review:
1.
actual case or controversy calling for the
exercise of judicial power;
2.
the person challenging the act must have
"standing" to challenge; he must have a personal and
substantial interest in the case such that he has
sustained, or will sustain, direct injury as a result of its
enforcement;
3.
the question of constitutionality must be
raised at the earliest possible opportunity;
4.
the issue of constitutionality must be the very
lis mota of the case.
Thus, the exercise of our power of judicial review is subject to these
four requisites and the further requirement that we can only resolve
pure questions of law. These limitations, when properly and strictly
observed, should aid in the decongestion of the Court's workload. 35
(Citations omitted)

Here, there is no contrariety of legal rights that can be interpreted and
enforced on the basis of existing law and jurisprudence. The PDP-Laban,
Peralta, et al., and the COMELEC are unanimous as to the mandatory ﬁling of
the SOCEs and the consequences of non-compliance. Further, the facts do
not show that any winning candidate was prevented from assuming oﬃce.
The dispute only pertains on whether the COMELEC can lawfully extend the
deadline for submission of the SOCEs and exempt the erring candidates and
political parties from administrative liabilities.
As the OSG aptly observed, the validity of the statutory provision itself
is not the lis mota of the case. In this circumstance, the Court reserves the
issue on constitutionality of a statute until the proper petition is ﬁled
between opposing parties and defers from rendering an advisory opinion
because it serves no useful purpose and not binding upon the parties, thus:
Basic in litigation raising constitutional issues is the
requirement that there must be an actual case or
controversy. This Court cannot render an advisory opinion.
We assume that the Constitution binds all other constitutional
departments, instrumentalities, and organs. We are aware that in the
exercise of their various powers, they do interpret the text of the
Constitution in the light of contemporary needs that they should
address. A policy that reduces this Court to an adviser for
oﬃcial acts by the other departments that have not yet been
done would unnecessarily tax our resources. It is inconsistent
with our role as ﬁnal arbiter and adjudicator and weakens the
entire system of the Rule of Law. Our power of judicial review is a
duty to make a ﬁnal and binding construction of law. This power
should generally be reserved when the departments have
exhausted any and all acts that would remedy any perceived
violation of right. The rationale that deﬁnes the extent of our
doctrines laying down exceptions to our rules on justiciability are
clear: Not only should the pleadings show a convincing violation of a

right, but the impact should be shown to be so grave, imminent, and
irreparable that any delayed exercise of judicial review or deference
would undermine fundamental principles that should be enjoyed by
the party complaining or the constituents that they legitimately
represent. 36 (Emphases supplied)

Also, the Court declines to entertain Peralta, et al.'s prayer to hold the
commissioners who voted in favor of Resolution No. 10147 guilty of betrayal
of public trust. Suﬃce it to say that this proceeding is not the proper vehicle
to decide the liability of the commissioners, if any. Verily, the betrayal of
public trust is a ground for impeachment to remove from oﬃce members of
the constitutional commissions. 37 However, an impeachment complaint is
not filed before this Court and must be instituted and examined in the proper
forum. 38
Taken together, the COMELEC issued Resolution No. 10147 with grave
abuse of discretion which is arbitrary, capricious, whimsical, or despotic
exercise of judgment as when the assailed resolution is bereft of any factual
and legal justiﬁcation, or when the disputed act of the tribunal goes beyond
the limits of discretion thus effecting an injustice. 39

Applying the doctrine of operative
fact, the SOCEs submitted within the
extended deadline set under COMELEC
Resolution No. 10147 are deemed
timely filed.
It is undisputed that COMELEC Resolution No. 10147 is an
administrative act and has the force of law. However, the COMELEC gravely
abused its discretion in issuing the resolution and is invalid in so far as it
extended the deadline for submission of SOCEs for the 2016 elections until
June 30, 2016. Consequently, the administrative act cannot be a source of
legal rights. Article 7 of the New Civil Code is explicit that "administrative or
executive acts, orders and regulations shall be valid only when they are not
contrary to the laws or the Constitution." 40
Nevertheless, equity and fair play call for the application of the
doctrine of operative fact which recognizes the eﬀects of the law or
executive issuance prior to its invalidation when relied upon by the public in
good faith. 41 In Agbayani, de v. Phil. National Bank, 42 the application of the
doctrine of operative fact was extensively discussed as follows:
1.
The decision now on appeal reﬂects the orthodox view
that an unconstitutional act, for that matter an executive order or a
municipal ordinance likewise suﬀering from that inﬁrmity, cannot be
the source of any legal rights or duties. Nor can it justify any oﬃcial
act taken under it. Its repugnancy to the fundamental law once
judicially declared results in its being to all intents and purposes a
mere scrap of paper. As the new Civil Code puts it: "When the courts
declare a law to be inconsistent with the Constitution, the former shall
be void and the latter shall govern. Administrative or executive acts,
orders and regulations shall be valid only when they are not contrary
to the laws or the Constitution." It is understandable why it should be
so, the Constitution being supreme and paramount. Any legislative or

executive act contrary to its terms cannot survive.
Such a view has support in logic and possesses the merit of
simplicity. It may not however be suﬃciently realistic. It does
not admit of doubt that prior to the declaration of nullity such
challenged legislative or executive act must have been in
force and had to be complied with. This is so as until after the
judiciary, in an appropriate case, declares its invalidity, it is
entitled to obedience and respect. Parties may have acted under
it and may have changed their positions. What could be more ﬁtting
than that in a subsequent litigation regard be had to what has been
done while such legislative or executive act was in operation and
presumed to be valid in all respects. It is now accepted as a
doctrine that prior to its being nullified, its existence as a fact
must be reckoned with. This is merely to reﬂect awareness that
precisely because the judiciary is the governmental organ which has
the ﬁnal say on whether or not a legislative or executive measure is
valid, a period of time may have elapsed before it can exercise the
power of judicial review that may lead to a declaration of nullity. It
would be to deprive the law of its quality of fairness and
justice then, if there be no recognition of what had transpired
prior to such adjudication.
In the language of an American Supreme Court decision: "The
actual existence of a statute, prior to such a determination
[of unconstitutionality], is an operative fact and may have
consequences which cannot justly be ignored. The past cannot
always be erased by a new judicial declaration. The eﬀect of the
subsequent ruling as to invalidity may have to be considered in
various aspects, — with respect to particular relations, individual and
corporate, and particular conduct, private and oﬃcial." x x x. 43
(Emphases supplied.)

Here, the candidates and political parties that submitted their SOCEs
following the extended deadline acted in good faith. They honestly believed
on the resolution that was issued pursuant to the COMELEC's rule-making
authority. 44 The COMELEC even previously extended the deadlines for the
ﬁling of SOCEs in the 2010 and 2013 national and local elections. The
COMELEC's authority to extend the deadline was not questioned except now.
Accordingly, the eﬀects of accomplished acts prior to the invalidation of
COMELEC Resolution No. 10147 should be allowed to stand. The SOCEs
submitted within the extended period or until June 30, 2016 are deemed
timely filed.
In sum, the Court acknowledges the COMELEC's indispensable role as
an independent constitutional body in ensuring free, orderly, honest,
peaceful, and credible elections. Yet, the COMELEC's zeal in administering
election laws is still circumscribed by the law — the spring cannot rise higher
than its source. 45
FOR THESE REASONS, the Commission on Elections Resolution No.
10147 is declared void for being repugnant to the law. Applying the doctrine
of operative fact, however, the Statements of Contributions and
Expenditures for the May 9, 2016 national and local elections that were

submitted on or before June 30, 2016 are deemed timely filed.
SO ORDERED.

Gesmundo, C.J., Perlas-Bernabe, Hernando, Carandang, Inting,
Zalameda, Gaerlan, Rosario, J.Y. Lopez and Dimaampao, JJ., concur.
Leonen, * J., is on official leave but left vote. See separate concurring
opinion.
Caguioa and Lazaro-Javier, JJ., pls. see separate concurring opinion.

Separate Opinions
LEONEN, J., concurring:
I fervently believe that this case presents an opportune time for this
Court En Banc to rule on the constitutionality of Commission on Elections
Resolution No. 10147. I humbly submit that this Court must rule on this
issue. Nonetheless, I concur in the result and add my reasons in supporting
the declaration of illegality of Resolution No. 10147.


The validity of this issuance is being assailed insofar as it eﬀectively
creates additional qualifications to national and local elective candidates. 1
C i t i n g (Gios-Samar)
v.
Department
of
Transportation
and
2
Communications, the ponencia states that this Court must exercise judicial
restraint in passing upon constitutional questions if other grounds exist as
bases for the Decision. 3
I n Gios-Samar, petitioner Gios-Samar, Inc. ﬁled a petition for
prohibition against respondents Department of Transportation and
Communications and Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines, assailing the
constitutionality of the bundling of the invitation to prequalify and bid on
airport development, operations, and maintenance of multiple airports. At
the time the petition was with this Court, there had been no bidding yet, as
the ﬁling was done months ahead of the submission of prequaliﬁcation
queries and qualiﬁcation documents. During the proceedings, the
Department of Transportation and Communications asserted that petitioner
had no standing to sue and that the allegations of unconstitutionality of the
assailed bundling were speculative and conjectural; thus, there was no
justiciable controversy to speak of. The Civil Aviation Authority of the
Philippines, meanwhile, pointed out that petitioner did not allege any special
and compelling reason to justify its direct resort to this Court. 4
Contrary to petitioner Gios-Samar's insistence that the issues
presented were legal ones, this Court found that the issues involved were
factual. It is in this context that this Court held that where a legal issue
requires determination of a factual issue, such factual issue must ﬁrst be
brought before the trial court or the Court of Appeals. 5 Notwithstanding the
transcendental importance of a case, this Court ruled that it is generally not
clothed with power to tackle factual questions and play the role of a trial
court. 6 In the process of ruling as such, this Court discussed the "rules of
avoidance" and the need to exercise judicial restraint.

This case before us presents a purely legal issue. Therefore, the
discussion on the rules of avoidance and exercise of judicial restraint is
unsuitable.
While conceding that this case presents an issue of transcendental
importance, 7 the ponencia nonetheless stated that this constitutional issue
need not be discussed because no actual controversy exists and the
constitutional issue is not the lis mota of the case.
With due respect, I believe that the constitutional issues presented in
this case are justiciable. This Court should not avoid its constitutional duty to
decide these issues in view of their transcendental importance. Where a
controversy concerns fundamental constitutional issues, the threshold must
be adjusted to allow judicial scrutiny, so that issues may be resolved at the
earliest stage before anything irreversible is undertaken under cover of an
unconstitutional act. 8
In a recent case, 9 this Court En Banc explained:
An actual case exists "when the act being challenged has had a direct
adverse eﬀect on the individual challenging it." Thus, actual case
means the presence of that concrete adverseness that can be drawn
from the allegations raised by the parties in their pleadings:
Jurisprudence provides that an actual case or controversy is one
which "involves a conﬂict of legal rights, an assertion of opposite
hypothetical or abstract diﬀerence or dispute." In other words, "
[t]here must be a contrariety of legal rights that can be interpreted
and enforced on the basis of existing law and jurisprudence." Related
to the requirement of an actual case or controversy is the
requirement of "ripeness," meaning that the questions raised for
constitutional scrutiny are already ripe for adjudication." A question is
ripe for adjudication when the act being challenged has had a direct
adverse eﬀect on the individual challenging it. It is a prerequisite that
something had then been accomplished or performed by either
branch before a court may come into the picture, and the petitioner
must allege the existence of an immediate or threatened injury to
itself as a result of the challenged action."
xxx xxx xxx
Legal standing means "personal and substantial interest in a case
such that the party has sustained or will sustain direct injury as a
result of the governmental act that is being challenged." That the
party must present a personal stake in the case ensures the presence
of concrete adverseness:
In public or constitutional litigations, the Court is often
burdened with the determination of the locus standi of the
petitioners due to the ever-present need to regulate the
invocation of the intervention of the Court to correct any
oﬃcial action or policy in order to avoid obstructing the
eﬃcient functioning of public oﬃcials and oﬃces involved
in public service. It is required, therefore, that the
petitioner must have a personal stake in the outcome of
the controversy, for, as indicated in Agan, Jr. v. Philippine

International Air Terminals Co., Inc.:
The question on legal standing is whether such
parties have "alleged such a personal stake in the
outcome of the controversy as to assure that
concrete
adverseness
which
sharpens
the
presentation of issues upon which the court so
largely depends for illumination of diﬃcult
constitutional questions." Accordingly, it has been
held that the interest of a person assailing the
constitutionality of a statute must be direct and
personal. He must be able to show, not only that
the law or any government act is invalid, but also
that he sustained or is in imminent danger of
sustaining some direct injury as a result of its
enforcement, and not merely that he suﬀers
thereby in some indeﬁnite way. It must appear that
the person complaining has been or is about to be
denied some right or privilege to which he is
lawfully entitled or that he is about to be subjected
to some burdens or penalties by reason of the
statute or act complained of. 10 (Emphasis
supplied)

Here, there is a contrariety of legal rights that can resolved based on
existing law and jurisprudence. On one hand, petitioner PDP-Laban insists
that Resolution No. 10147 is allegedly void for being issued in excess of
respondent's delegated rule-making power. 11 On the other hand,
respondent Commission on Elections asserts that the 30-day period under
Section 14 of Republic Act No. 7166 is extendible and therefore its
Resolution No. 10147 is valid. Otherwise ( i.e., if the 30-day period is nonextendible and if Resolution No. 10147 was not issued), respondent would
have disallowed non-compliant oﬃcials from assuming oﬃce for violation of
this ﬁling requirement — which, in turn, would amount to prescribing an
additional qualiﬁcation for public oﬃce. 12 Verily, the constitutionality of
Resolution No. 10147 is the lis mota of this case.
In its Petition, petitioner alleged the following:
21.
Having addressed the procedural concerns in this case,
petitioner PDP-Laban will now proceed to comprehensively discuss
the substantive issue raised in this petition.
THE ASSAILED RESOLUTION NO. 10147, WHICH
EXTENDED THE DEADLINE FOR THE FILING OF SOCE
FROM JUNE 8 TO JUNE 30, 2016, IS CONTRARY TO
SECTION 14 OF RA 7166 WHICH MANDATES THAT THE
THIRTY (30)-DAY PERIOD FOR FILING OF SOCE IS NONEXTENDIBLE.
xxx xxx xxx
24.
. . . all candidates and parties who participated in the May 9,
2016 National and Local Elections, regardless of whether or not they
won or lost, must ﬁle their SOCEs and the relevant Schedules and
supporting documents not later than thirty (30) days after the day of

the election, or by June 8, 2016, Wednesday. This period for ﬁling of
SOCE is clearly and unarguably MANDATORY and NON-EXTENDIBLE.
25.
That being the case, Public Respondent COMELEC En Banc
cannot deny that it palpably violated that statutory mandate of
Section 14 of RA 7166 and purposely disregarded its own procedural
rules, i.e., Section 2, Rule 10 of Resolution No. 9991, when it
promulgated the questioned Resolution No. 10147.
xxx xxx xxx
27.
As discussed in CFU's Memorandum dated June 15, 2016, a
reading of Section 14 of RA 7166 would easily reveal that there is NO
DELEGATED AUTHORITY from Congress for the Public Respondent
COMELEC En Banc to fix the period to file SOCEs. . . .
xxx xxx xxx
PUBLIC RESPONDENT COMELEC EN BANC ACTED WITHOUT OR IN
EXCESS OF ITS JURISDICTION, OR WITH GRAVE ABUSE OF
DISCRETION AMOUNTING TO LACK OR EXCESS OF JURISDICTION,
IN PROMULGATING THE ASSAILED RESOLUTION NO. 10147
BECAUSE THE ISSUANCE THEREOF EXCEEDED THE DELEGATED
RULE-MAKING POWER OF THE PUBLIC RESPONDENT.
xxx xxx xxx
36.
However, Section 6 of Article IS(A) n of the 1987 Philippine
Constitution reminded the constitutional commissions like Public
Respondent COMELEC En Banc that:
Section 6.
Each Commission en banc may promulgate
its own rules concerning pleadings and practice before it
or before any of its oﬃces. Such rules however shall not
diminish, increase, or modify substantive rights.
(Emphasis supplied)
xxx xxx xxx
37.
Like all grants of powers, however, the grant to the Public
Respondent COMELEC En Banc of its express-enforcement and
administration, and rule-making and implied-interpretative-powers
are not without limitations. The exercise of these powers should
always be read in conjunction with, not in isolation from, the
Constitution and the laws from where it draws the power. 13
(Emphasis supplied)

On the other hand, in its Comment, the Commission on Elections
contended that:
67.
Nothing in Resolution No. 10147 oﬀends the constitutional
limitation that the COMELEC's rule-making power "shall not diminish,
increase, or modify substantive rights."
xxx xxx xxx
81.
For COMELEC not to allow, in the name of SOCE, so many
oﬃcials from assuming the oﬃces to which they were validly elected
will not only negate the sovereign people's mandate but will add a
qualiﬁcation for public oﬃce not heretofore prescribed under the
Constitution for high oﬃcials or by the Local Government Code for

local officials.
82.
It requires no serious debate that COMELEC is devoid of such
power. 14

To determine whether respondent went beyond its delegated rulemaking power in issuing Resolution No. 10147, which should therefore be
nulliﬁed, I submit that this Court must ﬁrst ascertain and interpret the
pertinent portions of the Constitution (i.e., provisions on the powers granted
to respondent as a constitutional commission vis-à-vis those providing the
substantive qualifications of a political candidate).
The legal issue posed is ripe for adjudication, as the challenged
resolution was allegedly issued and implemented to accommodate the pleas
of a single political party who lamented about the ﬁling requirement and
requested for an extension of the 30-day period, to the prejudice of the
petitioner who faithfully complied with the provisions of Section 14 of
Republic Act No. 7166. 15
The resolution on the constitutional issue in this case undoubtedly has
far-reaching consequences. The ponencia itself states that the legal issue
involved is of transcendental importance, as the resolution of this case will
affect "all political candidates and their liabilities for non-compliance with the
timely submission of their [Statement of Contributions and Expenditures]." 16
It also noted that this case "is capable of repetition" as respondent "had
previously issued similar guidelines extending the period to ﬁle the
[Statement of Contributions and Expenditures]." 17 As noted by Associate
Justice Mario V. Lopez:
[T]he [Commission on Elections] previously allowed extension of time
in ﬁling the SOCEs due to legal necessity and to prevent vacuum in
the public service, thus:
WHEREAS, the Commission [on Elections] En Banc
received several letter requests for extension of the
deadline to ﬁle the required [Statement of Contributions
and Expenditures] for the May 9, 2016 National and Local
Elections (NLE);
WHEREAS, as records show, the deadlines for the ﬁling of
[Statements of Contributions and Expenses] has been
invariably and consistently extended by the Commission
out of legal necessity and particularly in the 2010 and
2013 NLE wherein the Commission allowed the extension
of the deadline for ﬁling of [Statements of Contributions
and Expenses];
xxx xxx xxx
WHEREAS, it is clear from the express language of the
above-quoted provision that the phrase, "until he has
ﬁled the statement of contributions and expenditures
herein required," implies that the [Statements of
Contributions and Expenses] may be ﬁled beyond the
deadline of thirty (30) days from the date of the elections
as fixed herein.

NOW, THEREFORE, the Commission [on Elections] En
[B]anc, RESOLVED . . . to EXTEND the deadline of ﬁling
the Statement of Contributions and Expenditures to 30
June 2016 . . . in order to: (a) enable candidates and
parties who failed to submit their [Statements of
Contributions and Expenses] or whose [Statements of
Contributions and Expenses] do not comply with the
RULES and REGULATIONS GOVERNING CAMPAIGN
FINANCE AND DISCLOSURE to submit or correct their
campaign ﬁnance statements or reports; and (b)
encourage disclosure by candidates and parties their
campaign contributions and expenditures during the 2016
NLE and to enable the Commission [on Elections] to
initiate the ﬁling of administrative cases for the violation
of Section 14 of Republic Act No. 7166 and election
offenses related to campaign finance.
xxx xxx xxx
We ﬁnd it abhorrent to adopt the erroneous interpretation
that our duly elected public oﬃcials cannot assume oﬃce
simply because of the failure of the party treasurer to
submit the party's [Statements of Contributions and
Expenses] within the 30-day period deadline. The
resulting frustration of the people's mandate, the
widespread vacuum in the public service, and the
likelihood of a constitutional crisis, constitute an absurdity
not contemplated by the law. These are risks that the
[Commission on Elections] is not willing to take. 18

In this light, I this Court could have taken this opportunity to tackle the
constitutionality of Commission on Elections Resolution No. 10147,
especially where said issue is ripe for adjudication; is the lis mota of the
case; and is capable of repetition.
In our jurisdiction, elections are envisioned to be fair and inclusive. 19
This can be surmised from various constitutional provisions which place
importance on the equality of opportunity to proﬀer oneself for public oﬃce.
20 To this end, the Commission on Elections is empowered to enforce and
administer all laws and regulations relative to the conduct of an election. 21
"No other body is granted such plenary powers regarding elections." 22 In
view of this constitutional mandate, this Court has given the Commission on
Elections wide latitude in devising means and methods that will ensure the
accomplishment of the great objective for which it was created: free,
orderly, honest, peaceful, and credible elections. 23 This wide latitude,
however, is subject to the limitation that the Commission on Elections
cannot, under the guise of enforcing and administering election laws, impose
additional qualiﬁcations where the Constitution had already expressly
prescribed substantive constitutional limitations on these qualiﬁcations. Yet,
the Commission on Elections may regulate the exercise of the right to run for
public oﬃce — and as in the enjoyment of all other rights, subject this right
to procedural requirements in accordance with the Constitution and related
laws. 24

I n Akbayan v. Commission on Elections, 25 this Court upheld the
constitutionality of a resolution issued by the Commission on Elections which
regulated the conduct of voter's registration. In the process, this Court
likewise aﬃrmed the law which the Commission on Elections sought to
implement through the resolution, by stating that this law was issued
pursuant to the State's police power. This Court explained:
In a representative democracy such as ours, the right of suﬀrage,
although accorded a prime niche in the hierarchy of rights embodied
in the fundamental law, ought to be exercised within the proper
bounds and framework of the Constitution and must properly yield to
pertinent laws skillfully enacted by the Legislature, which statutes for
all intents and purposes, are crafted to eﬀectively insulate such so
cherished right from ravishment and preserve the democratic
institutions our people have, for so long, guarded against the spoils of
opportunism, debauchery and abuse.
To be sure, the right of suﬀrage ardently invoked by herein
petitioners, is not at all absolute. Needless to say, the exercise of the
right of suﬀrage, as in the enjoyment of all other rights, is subject to
existing substantive and procedural requirements embodied in our
Constitution, statute books and other repositories of law. . . .

As to the procedural limitation, the right of a citizen to vote is
necessarily conditioned upon certain procedural requirements he
must undergo: among others, the process of registration. Speciﬁcally,
a citizen in order to be qualiﬁed to exercise his right to vote, in
addition to the minimum requirements set by the fundamental
charter, is obliged by law to register, at present, under the provisions
of Republic Act No. 8189, otherwise known as the "Voter's
Registration Act of 1996."
Stated diﬀerently, the act of registration is an indispensable
precondition to the right of suﬀrage. For registration is part and
parcel of the right to vote and an indispensable element in the
election process. Thus, contrary to petitioners' argument, registration
cannot and should not be denigrated to the lowly stature of a mere
statutory requirement. Proceeding from the signiﬁcance of
registration as a necessary requisite to the right to vote, the State
undoubtedly, in the exercise of its inherent police power, may then
enact laws to safeguard and regulate the act of voter's registration
for the ultimate purpose of conducting honest, orderly and peaceful
election, to the incidental yet generally important end, that even preelection activities could be performed by the duly constituted
authorities in a realistic and orderly manner — one which is not
indiﬀerent and so far removed from the pressing order of the day and
the prevalent circumstances of the times.
Viewed broadly, existing legal proscription and pragmatic operational
considerations bear great weight in the adjudication of the issues
raised in the instant petitions.
xxx xxx xxx
It is an accepted doctrine in administrative law that the determination
of administrative agency as to the operation, implementation and
application of a law would be accorded great weight considering that

these specialized government bodies are, by their nature and
functions, in the best position to know what they can possibly do or
not do, under prevailing circumstances.
xxx xxx xxx
Under these circumstances, we rule that the [Commission on
Elections], in denying the request of petitioners to hold a special
registration, acted within the bounds and conﬁnes of the applicable
law on the matter — Section 8 of RA 8189. In issuing the assailed
Resolution, respondent [Commission on Elections] simply performed
its constitutional task to enforce and administer all laws and
regulations relative to the conduct of an election, inter alia, questions
relating to the registration of voters; evidently, respondent
[Commission on Elections] merely exercised a prerogative that chiefly
pertains to it and one which squarely falls within the proper sphere of
its constitutionally-mandated powers. Hence, whatever action
respondent takes in the exercise of its wide latitude of discretion,
speciﬁcally on matters involving voters' registration, pertains to the
wisdom rather than the legality of the act. Accordingly, in the absence
of clear showing of grave abuse of power of discretion on the part of
respondent [Commission on Elections], this Court may not validly
conduct an incursion and meddle with aﬀairs exclusively within the
province of respondent [Commission on Elections] — a body accorded
by no less than the fundamental law with independence. 26
(Emphasis supplied)

Similarly, in Kabataan Party-List v. Commission on Elections, 27 this
Court overruled the contention that biometrics validation requirement has
risen to the level of an unconstitutional substantive requirement in the
exercise of the right of suﬀrage. This Court held that a "qualiﬁed elector"
must still comply with registration procedures in order to vote. 28
There is a diﬀerence between qualiﬁcations 29 of candidates and
procedural requirements 30 concerning elections. Qualiﬁcation refers to "the
possession of qualities, properties (such as ﬁtness or capacity) inherently or
legally necessary to make one eligible [to run] for a position or oﬃce, or to
perform a public duty or function." 31 On the other hand, procedural
requirements or rules of procedure refer to "provisions prescribing the
method by which substantive rights may be enforced." 32
Like the exercise of the right of suﬀrage, the exercise of the right to
run for public oﬃce may be subject to existing substantive and procedural
requirements embodied in our Constitution, as well as related laws, rules
and regulations. 33 Similar to Akbayan, the assailed resolution in this case
was issued pursuant to the constitutional duty of the Commission on
Elections to ensure free, clean, and honest elections, and to ensure that
there are no over expenditures. It did not provide additional qualiﬁcations of
candidates.
I agree that the Commission on Elections committed grave abuse of
discretion in issuing the assailed Resolution No. 10147 for being contrary to
law. Contrary to the legal provision it seeks to implement ( i.e., Section 14 of
Republic Act No. 7166), Resolution No. 10147 not only extended the deadline

within which candidates for the May 9, 2016 national and local elections may
ﬁle their respective Statements of Contributions and Expenses, but also
indiscriminately removed the administrative liability that arose for failure of
a candidate to ﬁle a Statement of Contributions and Expenditures within the
original 30-day period. 34
Section 14 of Republic Act No. 7166 provides, among others, (a) a
mandatory 30-day period when a Statement of Contributions and
Expenditures must be ﬁled by every candidate; (b) the eﬀect of a failure to
ﬁle a Statement of Contributions and Expenditures within the 30-day period
(i.e., a candidate may be prevented from assuming oﬃce and may be held
liable for an administrative oﬀense); and (c) the eﬀect of non-ﬁling of a
Statement of Contributions and Expenditures for a second or subsequent
time. 35
Notably, the requirement of ﬁling a Statement of Contributions and
Expenditures under Section 14 of Republic Act No. 7166 was previously
found in Sections 107 36 and 111 37 of the Omnibus Election Code. While
Republic Act No. 7166 expressly repealed Sections 107 and 111 of the
Omnibus Election Code and no longer considers the failure to ﬁle a
Statement of Contributions and Expenditures within the prescribed period as
an election oﬀense, 38 Republic Act No. 7166 reincorporated Sections 107
and 111 of the Omnibus Election Code, albeit with modification.
Under the Omnibus Election Code, every candidate was previously
required to ﬁle a Statement of Contributions and Expenditures twice: ﬁrst,
within seven to ten days prior to the day of the election; and second, within
30 days after the elections. 39 At present, Republic Act No. 7166 requires
only one ﬁling of a Statement of Contributions and Expenditures, that is,
within 30 days after the elections.
As noted by Associate Justice Amy Lazaro-Javier, while Republic Act No.
7166 expressly authorized the Commission on Elections to set the period for
certain matters and to excuse noncompliance of other election oﬀenses,
Republic Act No. 7166 did not provide a similar leeway regarding the 30-day
period for the filing of a Statement of Contributions and Expenditures. 40
While the Legislature has had the occasion to modify the requirement
of the ﬁling of a Statement of Contributions and Expenditures and
reclassiﬁed the noncompliance thereof from an election oﬀense to an
administrative oﬀense, it nonetheless retained the word "shall" and the
effect of failure to comply with this requirement.
It bears emphasizing that the use of the word "shall" signiﬁes that the
ﬁling of the Statement of Contributions and Expenditures within 30 days
from the day of the elections is mandatory. 41 In view of the peremptory
nature of the provision of Section 14 of Republic Act No. 7166, the 30-day
reglementary period provided is "ﬁnal and non-extendible" 42 — as the
Commission on Elections itself previously declared.
Every statute should be construed in connection with those of the
same subject matter and should be able to stand together, if they can be
done by any fair and reasonable interpretation. 43 Assuming that there was

an ambiguity in Republic Act No. 7166 owing to a lack of express prohibition
against extending the 30-day reglementary period, the Commission on
Elections' position still cannot be countenanced; otherwise, it would render
nugatory a remedial measure 44 provided by Congress, and more
signiﬁcantly, render inutile the Commission on Elections' constitutional
mandate of ensuring free, orderly, honest, peaceful, and credible elections.
45 That being said, I respectfully disagree with the ponencia that winning
candidates may belatedly ﬁle their respective Statements of Contributions
and Expenses and can still enter the duties of their oﬃce upon submission of
the required Statements. 46
An administrative agency cannot amend an act of Congress.47
Administrative acts shall be valid only when they are not contrary to the
laws; 48 they must not override nor modify, but instead must remain
consistent with the law they seek to apply and implement. 49 In extending
the period provided by Section 14 of Republic Act No. 7166 and in eﬀectively
absolving the administratively liable arising for non-ﬁling of the Statement of
Contributions and Expenditures within the prescribed period, the
Commission on Elections supplanted the law it sought to implement and thus
gravely abused its discretion. In the same vein, I join Associate Justice Amy
Lazaro-Javier in saying that the repeated issuance of prior similar resolutions
by the Commission on Elections (which extended the period within which
Statements of Contributions and Expenses may be ﬁled) cannot serve as
precedent to justify the issuance of Resolution No. 10147.
Nonetheless, the eﬀects of an administrative issuance from the
promulgation until its invalidation by this Court may have to be recognized
as valid when relied upon by the public in good faith. 50 Thus, I agree with
t h e ponencia that the nulliﬁcation of Resolution No. 10147 ought not to
result in the reimposition of administrative liability upon the candidates of
the May 2016 elections, who relied thereon in good faith.


ACCORDINGLY, I vote to GRANT the Petition.
CAGUIOA, J., concurring:
The ponencia declares as void the Commission on Elections (COMELEC)
Resolution No. 10147 1 which extended the deadline for ﬁling of the
statements of contributions and expenditures (SOCEs) for the May 9, 2016
National and Local Elections, for being repugnant to Republic Act No. (R.A.)
7166. 2 Nevertheless, it applies the doctrine of operative fact, and deems as
timely ﬁled, the 2016 SOCEs which were submitted during the extension set
by Resolution No. 10147. 3
I concur.
I write this Separate Concurring Opinion to stress: 1) that the
mandatory character of the period for ﬁling of SOCEs set under Section 14,
R.A. 7166 does not preclude tardy winning candidates from assuming their
oﬃces after such ﬁling, and 2) the import and coverage of the penal
provisions under Section 14.

While the period fixed in Section 14,

R.A. 7166 is mandatory, the filing of
SOCEs beyond the same does not bar
the assumption to office of candidates
who won in the elections.
I agree with the ponencia's conclusion that the COMELEC committed
grave abuse of discretion in issuing Resolution No. 10147 which extended
the ﬁling of the SOCEs for the May 9, 2016 elections, beyond the 30-day
period provided in Section 14 of R.A. 7166. That such period is mandatory is
clear from the letter of the law, thus:
SEC. 14.
Statement of Contributions and Expenditures:
Effect of Failure to File Statement. — Every candidate and treasurer of
the political party shall, within thirty (30) days after the day of
the election, ﬁle in duplicate with the oﬃces of the Commission the
full, true and itemized statement of all contributions and expenditures
in connection with the election.
xxx xxx xxx (Emphasis supplied)

In Pilar v. Commission on Elections 4 (Pilar), the Court had interpreted
this provision as mandatory, thus:
Furthermore, Section 14 of the law uses the word "shall." As a
general rule, the use of the word "shall" in a statute implies that the
statute is mandatory, and imposes a duty which may be enforced,
particularly if public policy is in favor of this meaning or where public
interest is involved. We apply the general rule ( Baranda v. Gustilo ,
165 SCRA 757 [1988]; Diokno v. Rehabilitation Finance Corporation ,
91 Phil. 608 [1952]). 5

Pilar likewise explained that the law's policy is to regulate expenditures
of candidates by requiring the ﬁling of SOCEs and limiting the amount of
money that a candidate may spend, for the ultimate objective of clean
elections that is expressive of the true will of the people, thus:
The state has an interest in seeing that the electoral process is
clean, and ultimately expressive of the true will of the electorate. One
way of attaining such objective is to pass legislation regulating
contributions and expenditures of candidates, and compelling the
publication of the same. Admittedly, contributions and expenditures
are made for the purpose of inﬂuencing the results of the elections
(B.P. Blg. 881, Sec. 94; Resolution No. 2348, Sec. 1). Thus, laws and
regulations prescribe what contributions are prohibited (B.P. Blg. 881,
Sec. 95; Resolution No. 2348; Sec. 4), or unlawful (B.P. Blg. 881, Sec.
96), and what expenditures are authorized (B.P. Blg. 881, Sec. 102;
R.A. No. 7166, Sec. 13; Resolution No. 2348, Sec. 7) or lawful
(Resolution No. 2348, Sec. 8).
Such statutes are not peculiar to the Philippines. In "corrupt and
illegal practices acts" of several states in the United States, as well as
in federal statutes, expenditures of candidates are regulated by
requiring the ﬁling of statements of expenses and by limiting the
amount of money that may be spent by a candidate x x x. 6

Hence, the mandatory nature of Section 14 is evident from its letter as
well as its purpose. The COMELEC, as a mere administrative body tasked to

enforce the law, cannot alter its provisions. Having done so by issuing
Resolution No. 10147 which extended the deadline ﬁxed in the law, the
COMELEC exceeded its jurisdiction and committed grave abuse of discretion.
Further, it appears that the COMELEC, in issuing Resolution No. 10147,
was impelled by an erroneous interpretation of the law, other than on its
mandatory character. This is evident from some of its claimed objectives in
issuing said resolution — to "avoid a constitutional crisis by not impeding the
assumption to oﬃce of the then Vice President-Elect" 7 and to "avoid a
serious vacuum in governance by not barring 5 Senators, 115 Congressmen,
40 Governors, and a host of local oﬃcials from assuming oﬃce." 8 Moreover,
the facts reveal that the COMELEC had likewise extended the deadline for
ﬁling of SOCEs in the 2010 and 2013 elections, for 15 days and one year,
respectively, 9 presumably for the same purposes as the subject extension.
From these, it appears that as early as in 2010, the COMELEC — the
main government body tasked to execute R.A. 7166 — had been under the
impression that winning candidates who ﬁle their SOCEs beyond that 30-day
period in Section 14, are barred from assuming the oﬃces to which they are
elected. This appears to be the reason why the COMELEC saw the need to
issue extensions to avert political vacuums. This construction is triggered by
the second paragraph of Section 14 that prohibits such winning candidates
from assuming office should they fail to file their SOCEs.
This is erroneous, and demonstrates the need to ﬁnally clarify and
emphasize the real import of the law.
It is a basic statutory construction rule that particular words, clauses
and phrases should not be studied as detached and isolated expressions, but
the whole and every part of the statute must be considered in ﬁxing the
meaning of any of its parts, and in order to produce a harmonious whole. 10
Here, Section 14 reads:
SEC. 14.
Statement of Contributions and Expenditures:
Effect of Failure to File Statement. — Every candidate and treasurer of
the political party shall, within thirty (30) days after the day of
the election, ﬁle in duplicate with the oﬃces of the Commission the
full, true and itemized statement of all contributions and expenditures
in connection with the election.
No person elected to any public oﬃce shall enter upon
the duties of his oﬃce until he has ﬁled the statement of
contributions and expenditures herein required.
The same prohibition shall apply if the political party which
nominated the winning candidate fails to ﬁle the statement required
herein within the period prescribed by this Act.
Except candidates for elective barangay oﬃce, failure to
ﬁle the statements or reports in connection with electoral
contributions and expenditures as required herein shall
constitute an administrative oﬀense for which the oﬀenders
shall be liable to pay an administrative ﬁne ranging from One
thousand pesos ([P]1,000.00) to Thirty thousand pesos
([P]30,000.00), in the discretion of the Commission.

The ﬁne shall be paid within thirty (30) days from receipt of
notice of such failure; otherwise, it shall be enforceable by a writ of
execution issued by the Commission against the properties of the
offender.
It shall be the duty of every city or municipal election registrar
to advise in writing, by personal delivery or registered mail, within
ﬁve (5) days from the date of election all candidates residing in his
jurisdiction to comply with their obligation to ﬁle their statements of
contributions and expenditures.
For the commission of a second or subsequent oﬀense
under this section, the administrative ﬁne shall be from Two
thousand pesos ([P]2,000.00) to Sixty thousand pesos
([P]60,000.00), in the discretion of the Commission. In
addition, the oﬀender shall be subject to perpetual
disqualification to hold public office. (Emphasis and underscoring
supplied)

A reading of the second paragraph above shows that it merely
prevents a winning candidate from assuming the oﬃce to which he is
elected until he has duly ﬁled his SOCE. In other words, such ﬁling of the
SOCE is a condition precedent to the assumption of an elective oﬃce. This is
regardless of whether the ﬁling is made within or beyond the 30-day period
ﬁxed in paragraph 1. That said, what the belated ﬁling triggers is paragraph
4, that is, such belated ﬁling gives rise to an administrative oﬀense for which
the tardy candidate shall be liable to pay fines.
Hence, the Court's ﬁnding in the present case that Section 14's 30-day
period is mandatory does not bar a winning candidate who ﬁled beyond said
period from assuming oﬃce. To stress, the 30-day period is mandatory only
in the sense that a violation thereof — that is, the belated ﬁling of a SOCE —
constitutes an administrative oﬀense penalized with the paying of ﬁnes. The
tardy winning candidate shall still enter upon the duties of his or her oﬃce
but only after he or she has duly filed his or her SOCE.
This reading is consistent with the deliberations of the lawmakers
which, while showing the intention to make mandatory the twin
requirements of Section 14 — the act of filing the SOCE and the period within
which the same should be ﬁled — does not show that the belated ﬁling
amounts to a forfeiture of the seat a winning candidate had won in the
elections. The evident intention is that the candidate shall be deprived of
such seat only until he files his SOCE, thus:
xxx xxx xxx
MR. PALACOL.
Your Honor, there are oﬃces where the statement of
contributions and expenses are supposed to be ﬁled. Now, 30
days after the election they are supposed to ﬁle that
statement of expenses and their contributions. With this
provision of law, any candidate or interested party can go
to the particular office where the supposed statement has
to be ﬁled. And from that they can verify whether or not this
particular winning candidate had ﬁled his statement of

contribution and expenditures. Now, it says here that not
until and unless this winning candidate has ﬁled his
statement of contributions and expenses he cannot
assume office.
xxx xxx xxx
Now if a winning candidate is really desirous of assuming
his position, as a matter of fact, you will observe that our
election is on May 11, 1992 and the assumption is on June
30, which is more than 30 days. You can easily determine
whether or not he had ﬁled the corresponding statement. He is
going to assume his oﬃce afternoon of June 30, 1992, more than
30 days period. So, he could just simply go to the particular office
and check there whether this particular winning candidate had
filed his statement. This is the scenario that will happen. 11

From the foregoing, it is evident that the lawmakers' intent in ﬁxing a
30-day deadline from the day of the elections, which expires before the
synchronized assumption of oﬃce of winning candidates on June 30
following such elections, 12 is to aﬀord any interested party the opportunity
to conﬁrm if a winning candidate has duly ﬁled the SOCE. This includes the
winning candidate himself or herself, who may verify from the COMELEC his
or her compliance with Section 14, and who may still remedy any lapse
therein before the scheduled assumption of his elected oﬃce, if he or she "is
really desirous of assuming" the same.


Moreover, this construction of the law will prevent the frustration of the
people's votes brought about by a mere tardiness on the part of their
elected candidates. After all, election laws are liberally and equitably
construed to give fullest eﬀect to the manifest will of the people. 13 All
doubts should be resolved in favor of the elected candidates' eligibility,
because the determination of the true will of the electorate must prevail. 14
This liberal policy in favor of an elected oﬃcial is further supported by the
statutory construction rule that, with respect to election laws, mandatory
provisions requiring certain steps before election will be construed as
directory after the elections, to give effect to the will of the electorate. 15
Hence, contrary to the impression of the COMELEC, the concerned
candidates in the present case who ﬁled their SOCEs beyond the 30-day
deadline would not have been barred from assuming their oﬃces, even in
the absence of Resolution No. 10147 which extended the deadline for ﬁling.
Instead, the tardy candidates were only liable to pay the administrative ﬁnes
under Section 14.

The penalties under Section 14 of R.A.
7166 apply to all persons who filed a
Certificate of Candidacy (CoC) but
failed to file a SOCE in accordance
with the requirements of Section 14.
It bears noting that paragraph 4 speaks only of "failure[s] to ﬁle"
SOCEs, lending the impression that it may not cover belated filings, thus:
SEC. 14.


xxx


xxx xxx xxx
Except candidates for elective barangay oﬃce, failure to ﬁle
the statements or reports in connection with electoral
contributions and expenditures as required herein shall
constitute an administrative oﬀense for which the oﬀenders shall be
liable to pay an administrative ﬁne ranging from One thousand pesos
([P]1,000.00) to Thirty thousand pesos ([P]30,000.00), in the
discretion of the Commission.
xxx xxx xxx (Emphasis and underscoring supplied)

However, I submit that it likewise applies to SOCEs ﬁled beyond the 30day deadline ﬁxed in the law. A careful reading of the law shows that it
covers all failures to ﬁle SOCEs "as required herein." In other words, a SOCE
which, although ﬁled, failed to comply with the requirements of Section 14,
still falls under paragraph 4. Such requirements include the 30-day period
ﬁxed in Section 14's, paragraph 1. Hence, a person who ﬁles a SOCE in
violation of the required 30-day period is liable for the administrative oﬀense
and fine set in paragraph 4.
Moreover, while a ﬁrst oﬀense of such failure to duly ﬁle a SOCE shall
not deprive a winning candidate of his or her oﬃce, as it merely results in a
liability to pay ﬁnes, a second or subsequent oﬀense triggers the last
paragraph of Section 14. Hence, the erring candidate shall suﬀer, not only to
pay a larger amount of ﬁne, but likewise a perpetual disqualiﬁcation from
holding public office.
At this juncture, it bears noting that the term "candidate," as used in
Section 14, had been taken by the Court to include those who have ﬁled and
later withdrew their CoCs prior to the elections. Hence, in a case where the
candidate withdrew his CoC three days after its ﬁling, the Court aﬃrmed the
P10,000.00 fine that the COMELEC imposed upon him, and held:
Section 14 of R.A. No. 7166 states that "every candidate" has
the obligation to file his statement of contributions and expenditures.
Well-recognized is the rule that where the law does not
distinguish, courts should not distinguish. Ubi lex non distinguit nec
nos distinguere debemos (Philippine British Assurance Co., Inc. v.
Intermediate Appellate Court, 150 SCRA 520 [1987]; cf. Olfato v.
Commission on Elections, 103 SCRA 741 [1981]). No distinction is to
be made in the application of a law where none is indicated (Lo Cham
v. Ocampo, 77 Phil. 636 [1946]).
In the case at bench, as the law makes no distinction or
qualiﬁcation as to whether the candidate pursued his candidacy or
withdrew the same, the term "every candidate" must be deemed to
refer not only to a candidate who pursued his campaign, but also to
one who withdrew his candidacy. 16

Likewise, a candidate who had failed to submit his SOCE twice although
he withdrew his CoC prior to the last elections, is liable to suﬀer the exacting
penalties of bigger ﬁne and perpetual disqualiﬁcation under the last
paragraph of Section 14. In Maturan v. COMELEC , 17 the Court rejected said
candidate's defense of good faith, and that, under the circumstances, the

penalty was excessive, harsh and cruel, so as to be proscribed by the
Constitution, thus:
Still, in a ﬁnal attempt to evade liability, the petitioner
describes the penalty of perpetual disqualification as excessive, harsh
and cruel, and, consequently, unconstitutional pursuant to Section
19(1), Article III of the 1987 Constitution x x x.
xxx xxx xxx
He contends that the failure to ﬁle the SOCE is an oﬀense far
less grave than the serious crimes under the Revised Penal Code and
the grave oﬀenses under the civil service laws. Accordingly, equating
the non-ﬁling of the SOCE with the latter oﬀenses is irrational and
unwarranted.
The petitioner's contention does not impress.
xxx xxx xxx
We have already settled that the constitutional proscription
under the Bill of Rights extends only to situations of extreme
corporeal or psychological punishment that strips the individual of his
humanity. The proscription is aimed more at the form or character of
the punishment rather than at its severity x x x. 18

Moreover, the law does not distinguish between those who have
actually received contributions or made expenditures, and those who
have/did not. In Pilar, the Court noted that COMELEC Resolution No. 2348
does not excuse from ﬁling a SOCE those candidates who had not received
contributions nor made expenditures, and, in fact, requires such candidate
to reflect in the SOCE those facts.
At this juncture, it may also be well to clarify that Section 14's
penalties are not applicable to election spending in excess of the limits ﬁxed
under Section 13 19 of R.A. 7166, which, the Court has ruled, amended
Section 100 of Batas Pambansa Bilang 881, otherwise known as the
"Omnibus Election Code" (OEC), and thus remains an election oﬀense under
Section 262 20 of the OEC. 21 The Court emphasized in Cumigad v. People , 22
that Section 14 refers only to non-ﬁling of SOCEs. In other words, Section
262 of the OEC and Section 14 of R.A. 7166 punish diﬀerent acts — election
overspending in the former, and failure to duly file SOCE in the latter.
In the present case, everyone who ﬁled a CoC with the COMELEC for
the 2016 elections but failed to submit a SOCE in accordance with the law —
regardless if such candidate withdrew his or her CoC before the elections, or
lost or won therein, and regardless if he or she actually received
contributions and expended — incurs the penalties provided under Section
14. Hence, they are all liable to pay the administrative ﬁne under the fourth
or last paragraph of Section 14, as the case may be, with the multiple
oﬀenders to suﬀer the additional penalty of perpetual disqualiﬁcation to hold
public office under the last paragraph.
Nevertheless, I agree with the ponencia's application of the Operative
Fact Doctrine, in light of the evident good faith of the concerned candidates
who honestly relied on Resolution No. 10147, which was issued pursuant to

the COMELEC's rule-making authority. Hence, I agree that the SOCEs ﬁled
during the extension under Resolution No. 10147, even though beyond the
mandatory 30-day period under R.A. 7166, should be deemed timely filed.
However, to clarify, I submit that the ruling of the Court in the present
case is without prejudice to the imposition of penalties for violation of R.A.
7166 or other applicable laws, on any ground other than the tardiness in the
filing of the subject SOCEs.
LAZARO-JAVIER, J., concurring:
I concur with the erudite ponencia of Justice Mario V. Lopez that the
Commission on Elections (COMELEC) committed grave abuse of discretion
when it extended the deadline for ﬁling of Statements of Contributions and
Expenses (SOCEs) in violation of the clear language of the law and the
legislative intent behind it. Pertinently, Section 14 of Republic Act No. 7166 1
(RA 7166) or the Synchronized Elections Law of 1991 reads:
SECTION 14. Statement of Contributions and Expenditures:
Effect of Failure to File Statement. — Every candidate and treasurer of
the political party shall, within thirty (30) days after the day of
the election, ﬁle in duplicate with the oﬃces of the Commission the
full, true and itemized statement of all contributions and expenditures
in connection with the election.
No person elected to any public oﬃce shall enter upon
the duties of his oﬃce until he has ﬁled the statement of
contributions and expenditures herein required.
The same prohibition shall apply if the political party
which nominated the winning candidate fails to ﬁle the
statement required herein within the period prescribed by
this Act. (Emphases supplied)
xxx xxx xxx

Based on this provision, candidates and treasurers of political parties
had until June 8, 2016 within which to ﬁle their respective SOCEs relative to
the May 9, 2016 elections. As it was, however. the COMELEC En Banc
promulgated Resolution No. 10147 2 dated June 23, 2016, extending the
filing of SOCEs to June 30, 2016.
As stated, I agree with Justice Lopez that the COMELEC acted in grave
abuse of discretion when it issued Resolution No. 10147.
First. Resolution No. 10147 obviously departed from the unequivocal
language of the law. Section 14 of RA 7166 is clear — "[e]very candidate and
treasurer of the political party shall, within thirty (30) days after the
day of the election, ﬁle in duplicate with the oﬃces of the
Commission the full, true and itemized statement of all
contributions and expenditures in connection with the election." As
duly noted by Justice Lopez, the use of the word "shall" means that the
period is mandatory. In fact, unless otherwise provided, all periods under RA
7166 are mandatory, viz.:
SECTION 4. Postponement, Failure of Election and Special Elections .
—xxx

In case a permanent vacancy shall occur in the Senate or House of
Representatives at least one (1) year before the expiration of the
term, the Commission shall call and hold a special election to
ﬁll the vacancy not earlier than sixty (60) days nor longer
than ninety (90) days after the occurrence of the vacancy.
However, in case of such vacancy in the Senate, the special election
shall be held simultaneously with the succeeding regular election.
xxx xxx xxx
SECTION 6.
Nomination and Selection of Oﬃcial Candidates. —
No political convention or meeting for the nomination or selection of
the oﬃcial candidates of any political party or organization or political
groups or coalition thereof shall be held earlier than the following
periods:
(a)

For President, Vice-President and Senators, one hundred sixtyfive (165) days before the day of the election; and

(b)

For Members of the House of Representatives and elective
provincial, city or municipal oﬃcials, seventy-ﬁve (75) days
before the day of the election.

SECTION 10. Annulment of the List of Voters. — Any book of voters
the preparation of which has been eﬀected with fraud, bribery,
forgery, impersonation, intimidation, force or any other similar
irregularity or which is statistically improbable may be annulled, after
due notice and hearing, by the Commission motu proprio or after the
ﬁling of a veriﬁed complaint: Provided, That, no order, ruling or
decision annulling a book of voters shall be executed within
sixty (60) days before an election.
SECTION
18.
Summary
Disposition
of
Pre-proclamation
Controversies . — All pre-proclamation controversies on election
returns or certiﬁcates of canvass shall, on the basis of the
records and evidence elevated to it by the board of
canvassers, be disposed of summarily by the Commission
within seven (7) days from receipt thereof. Its decisions shall be
executory after the lapse of seven (7) days from receipt by the losing
party of the decision of the Commission.
SECTION 19. Contested Composition or Proceedings of the Board:
Period to Appeal: Decision by the Commission . — Parties adversely
aﬀected by a ruling of the board of canvassers on questions aﬀecting
the composition or proceedings of the board may appeal the matter
to the Commission within three (3) days from a ruling thereon. The
Commission shall summarily decide the case within ﬁve (5)
days from the filing thereof.
SECTION 22. Election Contests for Municipal Oﬃces. — All election
contests involving municipal oﬃces ﬁled with the Regional Trial Court
shall be decided expeditiously. The decision may be appealed to the
Commission within ﬁve (5) days from promulgation or receipt of a
copy thereof by the aggrieved party. The Commission shall decide
the appeal within sixty (60) days after the ﬁling of the
appeal, which decision shall be ﬁnal, unappealable and
executory. (Emphases and underscoring added)

Notably, these provisions, along with Section 14, do not contain any
clause authorizing the COMELEC to extend the mandatory periods contained
therein. These provisions should be contrasted with those in the same law
expressly allowing the COMELEC to ﬁx a diﬀerent date or otherwise excuse
belated compliance, to wit:
Section 5. Election and Campaign Period. — Unless otherwise
ﬁxed by the Commission, the election period for the May 11,
1992 regular elections shall commence ninety (90) days
before the day of the election and shall end thirty (30) days
thereafter.
xxx xxx xxx
Section 31. Per Diems of Election Inspectors and Other Oﬃcials. —
The members of the board of election inspectors shall be paid a per
diem of Two hundred pesos (P200.00) each for services on
registration and revision days and Four hundred pesos (P400.00)
each on the day of the election. Provincial, city and municipal
treasurers, administrators and supervisors of the Department of
Education, Culture and Sports assigned by the Commission to
perform election duty shall receive a per diem of Four hundred pesos
(P400.00) each on election day.
Said per diem shall be paid by the cashier or other ﬁnance
oﬃcer of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports or
of the Commission within ﬁfteen (15) days after registration,
revision and election days, respectively. There being funds
actually available, any delay in said payments to any of the
above mentioned personnel without justiﬁable reason shall
constitute an election offense and all oﬃcials and other personnel
responsible therefor, directly or indirectly, shall be liable under
Sections 263 and 264 of the Omnibus Election Code. (Emphases and
underscoring added)

Indeed, had Congress intended for a ﬂexible period for compliance with
the SOCE requirement, the law could have easily said so. Yet Congress
deemed it proper to use the commanding word "shall" without carving any
exception to the rule. This solidiﬁes petitioner's position that the COMELEC
had no authority to issue Resolution No. 10147 for being contrary to Section
14 of RA 7166.
Second. The extension cannot ﬁnd justiﬁcation under the rule-making
power of the COMELEC either.


Despite its role as the implementing arm of the government in the
enforcement and administration of all laws and regulations relative to the
conduct of an election, the COMELEC has neither the authority nor the
license to expand, extend, or add anything to the law it seeks to implement.
The resolutions which the COMELEC issues for this purpose should always be
in accord with the law to be implemented, and should not override, supplant,
or modify the same. 3 Indeed, it is axiomatic that the clear letter of the law is
controlling and cannot be amended by a mere administrative rule issued for
its implementation; administrative or executive acts shall be valid only when
they are not contrary to the laws or the Constitution. 4

Here, the COMELEC arrogated unto itself the power to amend RA 7166,
the very law it is mandated to implement, when it extended the ﬁling of
SOCEs contrary to the clear language of Section 14.
In Lokin, Jr. v. Commission on Elections , 5 the Court partly nulliﬁed
Resolution No. 7804 insofar as it established an entirely new ground when a
party-list organization can substitute another person in place of the nominee
whose name has been submitted to the COMELEC. The Court held:
Indeed, administrative [Implementing Rules and Regulations]
adopted by a particular department of the Government under
legislative authority must be in harmony with the provisions of the
law, and should be for the sole purpose of carrying the law's general
provisions into eﬀect. The law itself cannot be expanded by such
IRRs, because an administrative agency cannot amend an act of
Congress.
The COMELEC explains that Section 13 of Resolution No. 7804 has
added nothing to Section 8 of R.A. No. 7941, because it has merely
reworded and rephrased the statutory provision's phraseology.
The explanation does not persuade.
To reword means to alter the wording of or to restate in other words;
t o rephrase is to phrase anew or in a new form. Both terms signify
that the meaning of the original word or phrase is not altered.
However. the COMELEC did not merely reword or rephrase the text of
Section 8 of R.A. No. 7941, because it established an entirely new
ground not found in the text of the provision. The new ground granted
to the party-list organization the unilateral right to withdraw its
nomination already submitted to the COMELEC, which Section 8 of
R.A. No. 7941 did not allow to be done. Neither was the grant of the
unilateral right contemplated by the drafters of the law, who precisely
denied the right to withdraw the nomination (as the quoted record of
the deliberations of the House of Representatives has indicated). The
grant thus conﬂicted with the statutory intent to save the nominee
from falling under the whim of the party-list organization once his
name has been submitted to the COMELEC, and to spare the
electorate from the capriciousness of the party-list organizations.

In other words, the COMELEC's exercise of its rule making power is not
an excuse for it to do actual legislation. As a spring cannot rise higher than
its source, 6 so must the COMELEC issuance not transcend the law it seeks to
implement.
Third. In extending the period for compliance beyond 30 days, the
COMELEC eﬀectively condoned, if not exempted oﬀenders from
administrative liability for violating Section 14 of RA 7166 between June 9 to
June 30, 2016.
To recall, the general rule is that an elected oﬃcial's term of oﬃce
begins every noon of June 30 immediately following his or her election. 7
Meanwhile, Section 14 of RA 7166 requires winning candidates to ﬁrst ﬁle
their respective SOCEs before they could assume office, thus:
No person elected to any public oﬃces shall enter upon the duties of

his oﬃce until he has ﬁled the statement of contributions and
expenditures herein required. (Emphasis added)

Contrary to the COMELEC's interpretation, the clause "until he [or she]
has ﬁled the [SOCE]" does not authorize the COMELEC to extend the 30-day
period for compliance. It merely underscores the fact that the ﬁling of
one's SOCE is a condition precedent to one's assumption of oﬃce
which must be done before he or she assumes such oﬃce normally
by noon of June 30. But even after noon of June 30, he or she must
still comply with the ﬁling of SOCE as condition precedent to his or
her assumption of oﬃce, without prejudice to his or her
administrative or criminal liability. Speciﬁcally, Section 14 of RA 7166
imposes a ﬁne ranging from Php1,000.00 to Php60,000.00 and even
perpetual disqualification from office:
Except candidates for elective barangay oﬃce, failure to ﬁle the
statements or reports in connection with electoral contributions and
expenditures are required herein shall constitute an administrative
oﬀense for which the oﬀenders shall be liable to pay an
administrative ﬁne ranging from One thousand pesos (P1,000.00) to
Thirty thousand pesos (P30,000.00), in the discretion of the
Commission.
The ﬁne shall be paid within thirty (30) days from receipt of notice of
such failure; otherwise, it shall be enforceable by a writ of execution
issued by the Commission against the properties of the offender.
It shall be the duty of every city or municipal election registrar to
advise in writing, by personal delivery or registered mail, within ﬁve
(5) days from the date of election all candidates residing in his
jurisdiction to comply with their obligation to ﬁle their statements of
contributions and expenditures.
For the commission of a second or subsequent oﬀense under this
section, the administrative ﬁne shall be from Two thousand pesos
(P2,000.00) to Sixty thousand pesos (P60,000.00), in the discretion of
the Commission. In addition, the oﬀender shall be subject to
perpetual disqualification to hold public office. 8

Thus, when the COMELEC extended the ﬁling of SOCEs from June 8,
2016 to June 30, 2016, all those who ﬁled their SOCEs in between these
dates, though non-compliant with Section 14 of RA 7166, are nonetheless
pardoned for their transgression.
But the law does not provide for any exempting circumstance for nonﬁling of SOCEs within the 30-day period. In fact, even those who withdrew
their candidacies are still required to comply with Section 14 of RA 7166. 9 In
other words, COMELEC Resolution No. 10147 crafted an exemption from
Section 14, RA 7166; indubitably, this is nothing short of usurpation of
legislative powers.
Fourth. In unilaterally extending the deadline for ﬁling of SOCEs, the
COMELEC supplanted the wisdom of the legislative branch with its own. As
Justice Lopez aptly observed, the legislature intended to create window
wherein concerned citizens may verify whether their local oﬃcials complied

with Section 14 of RA 7166 and, consequently, ﬁle the necessary complaint
or petition to prevent said officials from assuming office, thus:
MR. ALBANO.
Well, Mr. Speaker, again a provision on Section 15 states, "That
no person elected to any public oﬃce until he has ﬁled the
statement of contributions and expenditures herein required."
Now, Mr. Speaker, how do we verify whether that
candidate — the elected candidate has ﬁled his statement
of contributions and expenditures? We are aware, Mr.
Speaker, and based from the press reports of the
COMELEC that even in this House there are many who did
not comply with this provision. And yet, it is said here
that he cannot assume his duties as such elected oﬃcial
if he has failed to ﬁle the statement of contributions and
expenditures. So, Mr. Speaker, how do we verify this?
MR. PALACOL.
Your Honor, there are oﬃces where the statement of
contributions and expenses are supposed to be ﬁled.
Now, 30 days after the election they are supposed to ﬁle
that statement of expenses and their contributions. With
this provision of law, any candidate or interested party
can go to the particular oﬃce where the supposed
statement has to be ﬁled. And from that they can verify
whether or not this particular winning candidate had ﬁled
his statement of contribution and expenditures. Now, it
says here that not until and unless this winning candidate
has ﬁled his statement of contribution and expenses he
cannot assume office.
MR. ALBANO.
It is very clear here, the provision that the elected one cannot
enter upon the duties of his oﬃce. My question is, how can we
verify this? What can stop the elected candidate or the elected
one enter into his duties? As I said if we base from the press
reports that there are many — even who are Members of this
Congress have not ﬁled their statement of contributions and
expenditures and the reason why they are now facing criminal
charges.
MR. PALACOL.
Your Honor, as I was stating, these 30 days period is allotted to
any person who runs for a public office.
Now if a winning candidate is really desirous of assuming
his position, as a matter of fact, you will observe that our
election is on May 11, 1992 and the assumption is on June
30, which is more than 30 days. You can easily determine
whether or not he had ﬁled the corresponding statement.
He is going to assume his oﬃce afternoon of June 30,
1992, more than 30 days period. So, he could just simply
go to the particular oﬃce and check there whether this
particular winning candidate had ﬁled his statement. This

is the scenario that will happen.
MR. ALBANO.
Mr. Speaker, as I said, basing from COMELEC records there are
even Members of Congress now sitting here who have not ﬁled
their statement of contributions and expenditures and yet they
have entered into their duties. Why are we providing this, when
this is honored in breach than in compliance, Mr. Speaker? Is the
gentleman aware that there are even Members of Congress now
facing criminal charges for failure to ﬁle statement of
contributions and expenditures?
MR. PALACOL.
I am aware of that situation, your Honor, but as I was telling, your
Honor, there is suﬃcient time within which to verify
whether or not this particular candidate — of course when
one assumes oﬃce, in order there will be no hindrance, I feel
that he has to comply with the provision of law and that he ﬁle
his statement of expenditure and contribution. Anyway, as I
have stated a while ago, there are suﬃcient time. Our
election is on May 11, 1992, and they are going to assume
office only more than 30 days . . .
xxx xxx xxx
MR. ALBANO.
Mr. Speaker, my last query was about the veriﬁcation of how to
comply with item (b) of Section 15 and I would like to get the
reaction of our distinguished sponsor. How can this item (b) be
fully implemented without being disregarded in the sense that an
elected public oﬃce may enter into the duties of his oﬃce
without complying with the ﬁling of the statement of
expenditures and contributions? Because even in this very halls
of Congress according to the Commission on Elections, there
were many or there are members of Congress who are now
facing criminal charges for violation of the Election Code.


MR. PALACOL.
Your Honor, we agree with you on the present situation that
there are some winning candidates . . . who up to the present
have not yet ﬁled their statement of expenditures and
contributions. Well, in order to compel or hasten the ﬁling of the
certiﬁcate of expenditures and contributions, we inserted in this
provision of the present measure that before [he enters] the
assumption of the oﬃce to which he ran for and won, he has to
ﬁle his certiﬁcate of expenditures and contributions. And you will
observe, Your Honor, that is very explicit here: "No person
elected to public oﬃce shall enter upon the duties of his oﬃce
until he has filed the statement of contributions and expenditures
herein required." In other words, it is the duty of the winning
candidate to ﬁle his certiﬁcate of expenditures and contributions
before he enters into assumption of his duties.
Now anybody can question this winning candidate. And of
course, we know that there are oﬃces where a particular

candidate has to ﬁle his certiﬁcate of statement of expenditures
and contributions.
MR. ALBANO.
For the sake of argument, Mr. Speaker, . . .
MR. PALACOL.
Although, of course, there is always that possibility that a
candidate who had won may enter his duties without even ﬁling
his certiﬁcate of expenditures and contributions. But that is an
exception to the general rule.


MR. ALBANO.
Now, Mr. Speaker, for the sake of argument, suppose an elected
person did not ﬁle his statement of contributions and
expenditures as herein required, and then enters into an oﬃce,
how is he going to be booted out of that office?
MR. PALACOL.
I think, Your Honor, there is a proper remedy for that in our
courts of law.
MR. ALBANO.
So there is a need . . .
MR. PALACOL.
He could be enjoined from assuming the position to which he was
elected. (emphasis added)

The subsequent portion which may have been inadvertently omitted in
the draft ponencia is just as significant:
MR. ALBANO.
But he has taken his oath of oﬃce and actually performed —
does it mean therefore that one has to ﬁle a case in court before
he can be . . .
MR. PALACOL.
He has to ﬁle before he takes his oath — before he
assumes the position he has to ﬁle his certiﬁcate of
expenditures and contributions.
MR. ALBANO.
Mr. Speaker, the elected oﬃcial has already entered into his
duties, and as a matter of fact exercised his duties but failed to
ﬁle at the required day or the required period of time, how is he
going to be stopped from assuming when he has already
assumed oﬃce? Is there going to be a protest? And it seems
there is no penal provision in this section?
MR. PALACOL.
What is your suggestion, Your Honor?
MR. ALBANO.
Well, my recommendation is we might as well be silent and allow

the Revised Election Code provisions to prevail. After all, those
who have failed to ﬁle their statement of contributions and
expenditures are now facing criminal charges. And so it is best
that we delete this particular provision so that we do not carry a
provision here that is honored more in breach than in
compliance. (emphasis added)

Verily, a concerned citizen may ﬁle an injunctive suit to prevent a
winning candidate from assuming oﬃce come noon of June 30 immediately
following his or her election. Congress clariﬁed, however, that such suit must
be ﬁled before said winning candidate has assumed oﬃce. It, too, must be
ﬁled after the lapse of the 30-day period under Section 14, otherwise the
case would be premature. To illustrate, insofar as the 2016 elections is
concerned, the injunctive suit should be ﬁled from June 9, 2016 until before
noon of June 30, 2016.
But when COMELEC extended here the filing of SOCEs to June 30, 2016,
the deadline of ﬁling the same coincided with the date of assumption of
oﬃce. Thus, there was no more window for ﬁling injunctive suits. The
beginning, June 30, 2016, also marked the end, June 30, 2016. In other
words, COMELEC eﬀectively negated the remedy crafted by Congress
against non-compliant officials when it issued Resolution No. 10147.
The 30-day period in Section 14 of RA 7166 serves another practical
purpose — to minimize the opportunity for tampering or manipulation of
reported contributions and expenses. To recall, the provision does not simply
require the ﬁling of SOCEs. The law further requires that these SOCEs be
full, true, and itemized statements of all contributions and expenditures.
Extending the period for compliance, however, diminishes the transparency
of the reports and trustworthiness of the data reported in the SOCEs.
Worse, the COMELEC may have unwittingly given the candidates
suﬃcient elbow room to make sure that their SOCE conforms with the
mandatory spending limits in Section 13 of RA 7166. 10 In Cumigad v.
People, 11 we recognized that Section 14 of RA 7166 decriminalizes the
non-ﬁling of SOCEs as the law now only prescribes the imposition of
administrative ﬁnes. Yet we ruled that campaign overspending remains to be
a criminal oﬀense pursuant to Section 100 in relation to Sections 262 and
264 of Batas Pambansa 881 (BP 881) 12 or the Omnibus Election Code, as
well as Section 13 of RA 7166. 13 Thus, if we allow Resolution No. 10147 to
pass judicial scrutiny, we may have very well provided violators with the
avenue to "correct" their mistakes.
Finally. The grant of extensions to ﬁle SOCEs relative to the 2010 and
2013 elections does not justify the issuance of Resolution No. 10147. Sans
any legal basis, tradition will never justify any action devoid of authority.
Indeed, no practice or tradition established by mere tolerance can ripen into
a doctrine without judicial acquiescence. 14 In the absence of judicial
conﬁrmation of the validity of the challenged practice, the repeated but
erroneous application thereof will not crystallize into law.
I therefore vote to GRANT the petition and NULLIFY COMELEC

Resolution No. 10147 for having been issued in grave abuse of discretion.
Considering, however, that a number of candidates relied in good faith on
the extension granted under said resolution, it is only proper for the Court to
apply our ruling prospectively in accordance with the doctrine of operative
fact. Thus, SOCEs submitted within the extended period or until June 30,
2016 are deemed timely filed.
Footnotes
* On Official Leave.
1. Rollo , pp. 3-28.
2. OMNIBUS RULES & REGULATIONS GOVERNING CAMPAIGN FINANCE &
DISCLOSURE IN CONNECTION WITH THE 09 MAY 2016 NATIONAL & LOCAL
ELECTION AND ALL SUBSEQUENT NATIONAL & LOCAL ELECTIONS
THEREAFTER, dated October 2, 2015.
3. COMELEC Resolution No. 9991, Rule 10, Section 2, provides:
SEC. 2. When and how to file the SOCE and its supporting document. — x x x
The 08 June 2016 deadline shall be final and non-extendible.
Submissions beyond this period shall not be accepted. COMELEC
Resolution Nos. 9849 and 9873, Minute Resolution Nos. 13-0775 and 13-0823
are hereby repealed, insofar as they allowed the belated submission,
amendment and/or correction of campaign finance disclosure statements
and reports and the imposition of late penalties for the 2013 National and
Local Elections. (Emphasis supplied.)
4. AN ACT PROVIDING FOR SYNCHRONIZED NATIONAL AND LOCAL ELECTIONS AND
FOR ELECTORAL REFORMS, AUTHORIZING APPROPRIATIONS THEREFOR, AND
FOR OTHER PURPOSES. Approved, November 26, 1991.
5. IN RE: SEVERAL REQUESTS FOR EXTENSION TO FILE STATEMENT OF
CONTRIBUTIONS & EXPENDITURES BY CANDIDATES, POLITICAL PARTIES, AND
PARTY-LISTS ORGANIZATIONS IN RELATION TO THE 2016 NATIONAL AND
LOCAL ELECTIONS, promulgated on June 23, 2016.
6. Rollo , p. 34. The resolution provides that "RESOLVED, FURTHER, as the
COMMISSION hereby FURTHER RESOLVES, to impose administrative
fines upon candidates and parties who fail to file their SOCEs on or before
June 30, 2016 based on the Scale of Administrative Fines provided under
Resolution No. 9939."
7. Id. at 7, 29-46. Commissioners Al A. Parreño, Arthur D. Lim, Ma. Rowena Amelia
V. Guanzon, and Sheriff M. Abas voted to extend the deadline to file SOCE
until June 30, 2016. Chairman J. Andres D. Bautista, and Commissioners
Christian Robert S. Lim and Luie Tito F. Guia registered their Separate
Opinion (Id. at 36-37); and Dissenting Opinions, respectively. (Id. at 39-40;
and 45-46.)
8. Id. at 29-34.
9. Id. at 3-28.

10. Id. at 11-24.
11. Id. at 77-103.
12. Id. at 85. The COMELEC claimed that Resolution No. 10147 was issued to
achieve the following laudable and lawful objectives: (a) enable candidates
and parties who failed to submit their SOCEs or whose SOCEs do not comply
with the RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING CAMPAIGN FINANCE AND
DISCLOSURE to submit or correct their campaign finance statements or
reports; (b) encourage disclosure by candidates and parties their campaign
contributions and expenditures during the 2016 NLE and to enable the
Commission to initiate the filing of administrative cases for the violation of
Section 14 of Republic Act No. 7166 and election offenses related to
campaign finance; (c) avoid a constitutional crisis by not impeding the
assumption to office of the then Vice President-Elect; and (d) avoid a serious
vacuum in governance by not barring 5 Senators, 115 Congressmen, 40
Governors, and a host of local officials from assuming office.
13. Id. at 83-84. The COMELEC enumerated the following candidates, political
parties, and party-lists who were allowed to file their SOCE within the
extended period, namely: Roxas, Manuel Araneta (June 22, 2016); Drilon,
Franklin Magtunao (June 9, 2016); Pangilinan, Francis Nepomuceno (June 29,
2016); Baligod, Levito Doniego (June 10, 2016); Liban, Dante Ventura (June
30, 2016); Aksyon Demokratiko (June 29, 2016); Liberal Party (June 14,
2016); Pwersa ng Masang Pilipino (June 30, 2016); PML (June 29, 2016);
Movement of Women for Change and Reform (June 22, 2016); Kaisahan ng
mga Maliliit na Magsasaka (June 15, 2016); LPG Marketers Association, Inc.
(June 9, 2016); Union of Nationalist Democratic Filipino Organization (June 27,
2016); Talino at Galing ng Pinoy (June 10, 2016); Piston Land Transport
Coalition, Inc. (June 13, 2016); Tinderong Pinoy Party (June 21, 2016);
Confederation of Savings and Loan Associations, Inc. (June 30, 2016);
Barangay Natin (June 14, 2016); Aagapay sa Matatanda (June 10, 2016); and
Ang Prolife (June 29, 2016).
14. Id. at 77-99.
15. Id. at 253-273.
16. Id. at 311-321.
17. Cruz, Philippine Political Law, 2002 Ed., p. 259. See also Angara v. The Electoral
Commission , 63 Phil. 139 (1936); Board of Optometry v. Hon. Colet, 328 Phil.
1187, 1201-1203 (1996); Police General Macasiano (Ret.) v. NHA , 296 Phil.
56, 63-65 (1993); Santos III v. Northwest Orient Airlines, 285 Phil. 734, 742743 (1992); and Nat'l. Economic Protectionism Association v. Hon. Ongpin,
253 Phil. 643, 649 (1989).
18. Hon. Aguinaldo v. Pres. Benigno Simeon C. Aquino III, 801 Phil. 492, 522
(2016).
19. Pimentel v. Legal Education Board, G.R. Nos. 230642, 242954, September 10,
2019. See also Integrated Bar of the Phils. v. Hon. Zamora, 392 Phil. 618,
632-634 (2000); Kilosbayan, Inc. v. Morato , 320 Phil. 171-184-186 (1995);
and Public Interest Center, Inc. v. Judge Roxas, 542 Phil. 443, 455-456
(2007).

20. Gios-Samar, Inc. v. Department of Transportation and Communications, G.R.
No. 217158, March 12, 2019.
21. Bolos v. Bolos, 648 Phil. 630, 637 (2010).
22. Nepomuceno v. Rehabilitation Finance Corporation, 110 Phil. 42, 48 (1960).
23. Baking v. The Director of Prisons, 139 Phil. 110, 122 (1969).
24. Agcaoili v. Suguitan, 48 Phil. 676, 695-696 (1926).
25. 315 Phil. 851 (1995).
26. Id. at 857.
27. Id. at 856-857.
28. House of Representatives, Plenary Hearing, September 12, 1991, RA 7166,
782-793, pp. 782-786.
29. House of Representatives, Plenary Hearing, September 12, 1991, RA 7166,
793-795, pp. 791-795.
30. Loong v. COMELEC , 290-A Phil. 559 (1992).
31. Id. at 571-572.
32. 808 Phil. 86 (2017).
33. Id. at 93-94.
34. Province of North Cotabato v. Gov't. of the Republic of the Phils. Peace Panel on
Ancestral Domain (GRP), 589 Phil. 387, 480-481 (2008).
35. Supra note 20.
36. Belgica v. Hon. Exec. Sec. Ochoa, Jr., 721 Phil. 416, 661 (2013), Concurring
Opinion of J. Marvic M.V.F. Leonen.
37. CONSTITUTION, Art. XI, Section 2, provides:
SEC. 2. The President, the Vice-President, the Members of the Supreme
Court, the Members of the Constitutional Commissions, and the Ombudsman
may be removed from office on impeachment for, and conviction of, culpable
violation of the Constitution, treason, bribery, graft and corruption, other
high crimes, or betrayal of public trust. All other public officers and
employees may be removed office as provided by law, but not by
impeachment.
38. CONSTITUTION, Art. XI, Sec. 3, par. (2).
SEC. 3. x x x.
(2) A verified complaint for impeachment may be filed by any Member of the
House of Representatives or by any citizen upon a resolution or endorsement
by any Member thereof, which shall be included in the Order of Business
within ten session days, and referred to the proper Committee within three
session days thereafter. The Committee, after hearing, and by a majority
vote of all its Members, shall submit its report to the House within sixty
session days from such referral, together with the corresponding resolution.

The resolution shall be calendared for consideration by the House within ten
session days from receipt thereof.
39. The Senate Blue Ribbon Committee v. Hon. Majaducon, 455 Phil. 61, 71 (2003).
40. NEW CIVIL CODE, Article 7, paragraph 3.
41. Commissioner of Internal Revenue v. San Roque Power Corp., 719 Phil. 137,
161 (2013).
42. 148 Phil. 443 (1971). See also id. at 157-158.
43. Agbayani, de v. Phil. National Bank , supra note 41, at 447-448.
44. Republic Act No. 7166, Section 35. Rules and Regulations. — The Commission
shall issue rules and regulations to implement this Act. Said rules shall be
published in at least two (2) national newspapers of general circulation.
45. Abakada Guro Partylist v. Hon. Exec. Sec. Ermita, 506 Phil. 1, 207-208 (2005),
Concurring and Dissenting Opinion of Former Chief Justice Hon. Reynato S.
Puno.
LEONEN, J., concurring:
1. Ponencia , pp. 5 and 12.
2. Gios-Samar, Inc. v. Department of Transportation and Communications, G.R. No.
217158, March 12, 2019,
<https://elibrary.judiciary.gov.ph/thebookshelf/showdocs/1/64970> [Per J.
Jardaleza, En Banc].
3. Ponencia , pp. 12-14.
4. Id.
5. Id.
6. Id.
7. Id. at 6.
8. J. Puno, Separate Opinion in Province of North Cotabato v. Government of the
Republic of the Philippines Peace Panel on Ancestral Domain, G.R. Nos.
183591, 183752, 183893, 183951, and 183962, 589 Phil. 387, 557 (2008)
[Per J. Carpio-Morales, En Banc].
9. Confederation for Unity, Recognition and Advancement of Government
Employees v. Abad, G.R. No. 200418, November 10, 2020,
<https://elibrary.judiciary.gov.ph/thebookshelf/showdocs/1/67024> [Per J.
Leonen, En Banc].
10. Id.
11. Ponencia , p. 4.
12. Id.
13. Rollo , pp. 12-14.
14. Id. at 94-99.

15. Rollo , p. 41.
16. Ponencia , p. 6.
17. Id.
18. Id. at 3-4.
19. CONST., Art. II, Sec. 1.
20. CONST., Art. II, Sec. 26; Art. IX-C, Sec. 4; Art. XIII, Sec. 1. See also The Diocese
of Bacolod v. Commission on Elections, 751 Phil. 301, 391 (2015) [Per J.
Leonen, En Banc]; Osmeña v. COMELEC, 351 Phil. 692, 720 (1998) [Per J.
Mendoza, En Banc]; National Press Club v. COMELEC , 283 Phil. 795, 810
(1992) [Per J. Feliciano, En Banc].
21. CONST., Art. IX-C, Sec. 2.
22. J. Sereno, Concurring Opinion in Capalla v. Commission on Elections , 697 Phil.
644, 839 (2012) [Per J. Peralta, En Banc].
23. Id.
24. See Akbayan v. Commission on Elections , 407 Phil. 618, 635-636 (2001) [Per J.
Buena, En Banc], where this Court upheld a resolution issued by the
Commission on Elections, which regulated the process of voter's registration.
25. Id.
26. Id.
27. 775 Phil. 523 (2015) [Per J. Perlas-Bernabe, En Banc].
28. Id. at 546.
29. CONST., Art. VI, Sec. 3 and Art. VII, Sec. 3. See also Republic Act No. 7160
(1991), Title II, Chapter I, Sec. 39.
30. CONST., Art. VI, Secs. 2, 4, 8. See also CONST., Art. VII, Sec. 4; Art. IX-A, Sec. 6;
Art. IX-C, Secs. 2 (1), 2 (5), 3, 4, and 9.
31. 775 Phil. 523, 545 (2015) [Per J. Perlas-Bernabe, En Banc].
32. Primicias v. Ocampo , 93 Phil. 446, 452 (1953) [Per J. Bautista Angelo, En Banc].
33. See, for example, Section 6 of Republic Act No. 7941, otherwise known as the
Party-List System Act which provides that the Commission on Elections may
refuse or cancel, after due notice and hearing, the registration of any
national, regional or sectoral party, organization or coalition on the ground
that it violates or fails to comply with the laws, rules or regulations relating to
elections.
34. Rollo , p. 34. Resolution No. 10147 dated June 23, 2016 entitled "In Re: Several
Requests for Extension to File Statement of Contributions and Expenditures
by Candidates, Political Parties, and Partylists Organizations in relation to the
2016 National and Local Elections." As noted by Justice Lopez, the resolution
provides that "RESOLVED, FURTHER, as the COMMISSION hereby FURTHER
RESOLVES, to impose administrative fines upon candidates and parties who
fail to file their SOCEs on or before June 30, 2016 based on the Scale of

Administrative Fines provided under Resolution No. 9939."
35. Section 14 of Republic Act No. 7166 reads:
SECTION 14. Statement of Contributions and Expenditures: Effect of Failure
to File Statement. — Every candidate and treasurer of the political party
shall, within thirty (30) days after the day of the election, file in duplicate
with the offices of the Commission the full, true and itemized statement of all
contributions and expenditures in connection with the election.

No person elected to any public office shall enter upon the duties of his office
until he has filed the statement of contributions and expenditures herein
required.
The same prohibition shall apply if the political party which nominated the
winning candidate fails to file the statement required herein within the period
prescribed by this Act.
Except candidates for elective barangay office, failure to file the statements
or reports in connection with electoral contributions and expenditures are
required herein shall constitute an administrative offense for which the
offenders shall be liable to pay an administrative fine ranging from One
thousand pesos (P1,000.00) to Thirty thousand pesos (P30,000.00), in the
discretion of the Commission.
The fine shall be paid within thirty (30) days from receipt of notice of such
failure; otherwise, it shall be enforceable by a writ of execution issued by the
Commission against the properties of the offender. (Emphasis supplied)
36. Section 107 of the Batas Pambansa Blg. 881, otherwise known as Omnibus
Election Code provides:
Sec. 107. Statement of contributions and expenditures. — Every candidate
and treasurer of the political party shall, not later than seven days, or earlier
than ten days before the day of the election, file in duplicate with the office
indicated in the following section, full, true and itemized, statement of all
contributions and expenditures in connection with the election.
Within thirty days after the day of the election, said candidate and treasurer
shall also file in duplicate a supplemental statement of all statement of
contribution and expenditures not included in the statement filed prior to the
day of the election.
37. Section 111 of the Batas Pambansa Blg. 881 provides:
Sec. 111. Effect of failure to file statement. — In addition to other sanctions
provided in this Code, no person elected to any public office shall enter upon
the duties of his office until he has filed the statement of contributions and
expenditures herein required.
The same prohibition shall apply if the political party which nominated the
winning candidate fails to file the statements required herein within the
period prescribed by this Code.
38. See Section 39 of Republic Act No. 7166, which provides:
SECTION 39. Amending and Repealing Clause. — Sections 107 , 108 and 245
of the Omnibus Election Code are hereby repealed. Likewise, the inclusion in

Section 262 of the Omnibus Election Code of the violations of Sections 105,
106, 107 , 108, 109, 110, 111 and 112 as among election offenses is also
hereby repealed. This repeal shall have retroactive effect.
Batas Pambansa Blg. 881, Republic Act No. 6646, Executive Order Nos. 144
and 157 and all other laws, orders, decrees, rules and regulations or other
issuances, or any part thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are
hereby amended or repealed accordingly.
In turn, Section 262 of the Batas Pambansa Blg. 881 provides:
Sec. 262. Other election offenses. — Violation of the provisions, or pertinent
portions, of the following sections of this Code shall constitute election
offenses: Sections 9, 18, 74, 75, 76, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89,
95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110,
111, 112, 122, 123, 127, 128, 129, 132, 134, 135, 145, 148, 150, 152, 172,
173, 174, 178, 180, 182, 184, 185, 186, 189, 190, 191, 192, 194, 195, 196,
197, 198, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214,
215, 216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 223, 229, 230, 231, 233, 234, 235, 236, 239
and 240.
39. Batas Pambansa Blg. 881 (1985), Sec. 107.
40. See Reflections of Associate Justice Amy Lazaro-Javier, p. 3.
41. Pilar v. COMELEC , 315 Phil. 851-860, July 11, 1995 [J. Quiason, En Banc]. See
also Perez v. Court of Appeals, 325 Phil. 1014, 1022 (1996) [Per J. Romero,
Second Division]. See also Ponencia, p. 4. See also Reflections of Associate
Justice Amy Lazaro-Javier, p. 2.
42. Ponencia , p. 2; citing the Commission on Elections' Resolution No. 9991, Rule
10, Section 2.
43. Akbayan v. Commission on Elections, 407 Phil. 618, 639 (2001) [J. Buena, En
Banc].
44. See Reflections of Associate Justice Amy Lazaro-Javier, p. 9, which states:
Verily, a concerned citizen may file an injunctive suit to prevent a winning
candidate from assuming office come noon of June 30 immediately following
his or her election. Congress clarified, however, that such suit must be filed
before said winning candidate has assumed office. It, too, must be filed after
the lapse of the 30-day period under Section 14, otherwise the case would be
premature. To illustrate, insofar as the 2016 elections is concerned, the
injunctive suit should be filed from June 9, 2016 until before noon of June 30,
2016.
But when COMELEC extended here the filing of SOCEs to June 30, 2016, the
deadline of filing the same coincided with the date of assumption of office.
Thus, there was no more window for filing injunctive suits. The beginning,
June 30, 2016, also marked the end, June 30, 2016. In other words, COMELEC
effectively negated the remedy crafted by Congress against noncompliant
officials when it issued Resolution No. 10147.
45. CONST., Art. IX-C, Sec. 2. See also Section 6 of Republic Act No. 7941 which
empowers the Commission on Elections to cancel the registration of a
national, regional or sectoral party, organization or coalition for violation or

failure to comply with laws, rules or regulations relating to elections. In turn,
Section 14 of Republic Act No. 7166 provides that "[n]o person elected to any
public office shall enter upon the duties of his office until he has filed the
statement of contributions and expenditures herein required."
46. CIVIL CODE, Art. 7. See Ponencia , p. 11. See also Reflections of Associate
Justice Amy Lazaro-Javier, p. 2.
47. Echegaray v. Secretary of Justice, 358 Phil. 410, 448 (1998) [Per Curiam, En
Banc].
48. Lagman v. Medialdea, 812 Phil. 179, 290 (2017) [Per J. Del Castillo, En Banc].
49. Echegaray v. Secretary of Justice, 358 Phil. 410, 447-448 (1998) [Per Curiam,
En Banc].
50. Municipality of Tupi v. Faustino, G.R. No. 231896, August 20, 2019,
<https://elibrary.judiciary.gov.ph/thebookshelf/showdocs/1/65586> [Per J.
Lazaro-Javier, En Banc].
CAGUIOA, J., concurring:
1. Entitled, "IN RE: SEVERAL REQUESTS FOR EXTENSION TO FILE STATEMENT OF
CONTRIBUTIONS AND EXPENDITURES BY CANDIDATES, POLITICAL PARTIES,
AND PARTYLIST ORGANIZATIONS IN RELATION TO THE 2016 NATIONAL AND
LOCAL ELECTIONS," promulgated on June 23, 2016.
2. Entitled, "AN ACT PROVIDING FOR SYNCHRONIZED NATIONAL AND LOCAL
ELECTIONS AND FOR ELECTORAL REFORMS, AUTHORIZING APPROPRIATIONS
THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES," approved on November 26, 1991.
3. Ponencia , pp. 16-17.
4. G.R. No. 115245, July 11, 1995, 245 SCRA 759.
5. Id. at 764.
6. Id.
7. As cited in the ponencia, pp. 4-5; footnote no. 12.
8. Id.
9. Id. at 4.
10. National Tobacco Administration v. Commission on Audit , G.R. No. 119385,
August 5, 1999, 311 SCRA 755, 769.
11. Ponencia , pp. 8-9. Emphasis and underscoring supplied.
12. As fixed in the CONSTITUTION, Sec. 4, Article VII; Secs. 4 and 7, Article VI and
relevant laws (e.g., R.A. 7166 and LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE, Sec. 43).
13. Fernandez v. House of Representatives Electoral Tribunal, G.R. No. 187478,
December 21, 2009, 608 SCRA 733, 753.
14. Sinaca v. Mula, G.R. No. 135691, September 27, 1999, 315 SCRA 266, 282.
15. Id. at 281.

16. Pilar v. Commission on Elections , supra note 4, at 763.
17. G.R. No. 227155, March 28, 2017, 821 SCRA 587.
18. Id. at 595-596.
19. See Sec. 13 of R.A. 7166 that provides:
SEC. 13. Authorized Expenses of Candidates and Political Parties. — The
aggregate amount that a candidate or registered political party may spend
for election campaign shall be as follows:
(a) For candidates . — Ten pesos ([P]10.00) for President and Vice-President;
and for other candidates, Three pesos ([P]3.00) for every voter currently
registered in the constituency where he filed his certificate of candidacy:
Provided, That, a candidate without any political party and without support
from any political party may be allowed to spend Five pesos ([P]5.00) for
every such voter; and
(b) For political parties. — Five pesos ([P]5.00) for every voter currently
registered in the constituency or constituencies where it has official
candidates.
xxx xxx xxx
20. OMNIBUS ELECTION CODE, Sec. 262 states:
Sec. 262. Other election offenses. — Violation of the provisions, or
pertinent portions, of the following sections of this Code shall constitute
election offenses: Sections x x x 100
xxx xxx xxx.
21. Cumigad v. People, G.R. No. 245238, August 27, 2020 (Unsigned Resolution),
accessed at <https://sc.judiciary.gov.ph/15035/>.
22. Id.
LAZARO-JAVIER, J., concurring:
1. Synchronized Elections Law of 1991, Republic Act No. 7166, November 26, 1991.
2. IN RE: SEVERAL REQUESTS FOR EXTENSION TO FILE STATEMENT OF
CONTRIBUTIONS AND EXPENDITURES BY CANDIDATES, POLITICAL PARTIES,
AND PARTYLISTS ORGANIZATIONS IN RELATION TO THE 2016 NATIONAL AND
LOCAL ELECTIONS, Resolution No. 10147, June 23, 2016.
3. See Lokin, Jr. v. Commission on Elections , 635 Phil. 372, 402 (2010).
4. Id.
5. Id.
6. See De Santos v. Intermediate Appellate Court, 241 Phil. 300, 308 (1988).
7. Article VII, Section 4 of the Constitution:
Section 4. The President and the Vice-President shall be elected by direct
vote of the people for a term of six years which shall begin at noon on the
thirtieth day of June next following the day of the election and shall end at

noon of the same date, six years thereafter. The President shall not be
eligible for any re-election. No person who has succeeded as President and
has served as such for more than four years shall be qualified for election to
the same office at any time.
Section 43 of the Local Government Code:
Section 43. Term of Office. —
(a) The term of office of all local elective officials elected after the effectivity
of this Code shall be three (3) years, starting from noon of June 30, 1992 or
such date as may be provided for by law, except that of elective barangay
officials: Provided, That all local officials first elected during the local
elections immediately following the ratification of the 1987 Constitution shall
serve until noon of June 30, 1992.
8. Section 14, RA 7166.
9. See Maturan v. COMELEC , 808 Phil. 86, 92 (2017).
10. Section 13. Authorized Expenses of Candidates and Political Parties. — The
agreement amount that a candidate or registered political party may spend
for election campaign shall be as follows:
(a) For candidates. — Ten pesos (P10.00) for President and Vice-President;
and for other candidates Three Pesos (P3.00) for every voter currently
registered in the constituency where he filed his certificate of candidacy:
Provided, That a candidate without any political party and without support
from any political party may be allowed to spend Five Pesos (P5.00) for every
such voter; and
(b) For political parties. — Five pesos (P5.00) for every voter currently
registered in the constituency or constituencies where it has official
candidates.
Any provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding any contribution in cash
or in kind to any candidate or political party or coalition of parties for
campaign purposes, duly reported to the Commission shall not be subject to
the payment of any gift tax.
11. Cumigad v. People, G.R. No. 245238, August 27, 2020.
12. Section 100. Limitations upon expenses of candidates. — No candidate shall
spend for his election campaign an aggregate amount exceeding one peso
and fifty centavos for every voter currently registered in the constituency
where he filed his candidacy: Provided, That the expenses herein referred to
shall include those incurred or caused to be incurred by the candidate,
whether in cash or in kind, including the use, rental or hire of land, water or
aircraft, equipment, facilities, apparatus and paraphernalia used in the
campaign: Provided, further, That where the land, water or aircraft,
equipment, facilities, apparatus and paraphernalia used is owned by the
candidate, his contributor or supporter, the Commission is hereby
empowered to assess the amount commensurate with the expenses for the
use thereof, based on the prevailing rates in the locality and shall be
included in the total expenses incurred by the candidate.
Section 262. Other election offenses. — Violation of the provisions, or

pertinent portions, of the following sections of this Code shall constitute
election offenses: Sections x x x 100 x x x
xxx xxx xxx
Section 264. Penalties. — Any person found guilty of any election offense
under this Code shall be punished with imprisonment of not less than one
year but not more than six years and shall not be subject to probation. In
addition, the guilty party shall be sentenced to suffer disqualification to hold
public office and deprivation of the right of suffrage. If he is a foreigner, he
shall be sentenced to deportation which shall be enforced after the prison
term has been served. Any political party found guilty shall be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than ten thousand pesos, which shall be imposed upon
such party after criminal action has been instituted in which their
corresponding officials have been found guilty.
13. Section 13. Authorized Expenses of Candidates and Political Parties. —The
agreement amount that a candidate or registered political party may spend
for election campaign shall be as follows:
(a) For candidates. — Ten pesos (P10.00) for President and Vice-President;
and for other candidates Three Pesos (P3.00) for every voter currently
registered in the constituency where he filed his certificate of candidacy:
Provided, That a candidate without any political party and without support
from any political party may be allowed to spend Five Pesos (P5.00) for every
such vote; and
(b) For political parties. — Five pesos (P5.00) for every voter currently
registered in the constituency or constituencies where it has official
candidates.
Any provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding any contribution in cash
or in kind to any candidate or political party or coalition of parties for
campaign purposes, duly reported to the Commission shall not be subject to
the payment of any gift tax.
14. See Guingona v. Gonzales, 292 Phil. 327, 335 (1993).

n Note from the Publisher: Copied verbatim from official document. "Article IS(A)"
should be "Article IX(A)".

